We've got a treat in store for you over the next eight weeks

as we search for Britain's best amateur baker.

12 of the very best are ready to fight for the ultimate crown.

Elasticate those waistbands. It's the new series of The Great British Bake Off.

Thousands entered this year's nationwide search

for Britain's best amateur baker.

I feel like somebody's going to say, "Could you go? There's been a mistake."

But just 12 of the most passionate and skilled have made it through

to battle it out in the Great British Bake Off.

It's just like a dream come true, really. I'm so excited.

Over the next eight weeks, they'll be creating everything



from cakes, pies, bread and biscuits,

in challenges where every aspect of their baking skills will be pushed to the limit.

Worse-case scenario, make a complete hash of it and cry on camera.

Each week, those who fall short will be asked to leave.

It's like a village fete on adrenaline, really.

Only one can be crowned the winner of the Great British Bake Off.

There is some amazing talent in this marquee. It's just phenomenal.

Yes! Ah, ah, ah!

This year, the Great British Bake Off has found a home -

Valentine's Mansion, a 17th-century country estate that will play host

to the next chapter in the nation's love affair with home baking.

It's rolling pins at dawn.

Yes, The Great British Bake Off is about to begin,

and where better a place to start?



This show is all about cake.

The contestants are ready, and so are we. Excuse me.

- It's research.
- Where's mine?
- Get off.

None of these 12 people have baked in such a competitive environment before,

but they're about to face three increasingly complicated challenges over the next two days,

after which one of them will be crowned this week's star baker,

and another will have to leave The Great British Bake Off.

Morning, all, and a massive welcome.

We start as we mean to go on, with a challenge. This one is your signature bake,

so for this one we're asking you to show us tried and tested recipes.

Nothing too off-piste. Now is not the time to experiment.

We're looking for two hours of your finest baking,

producing 24 cupcakes, baked and iced,

to be judged by Paul and Mary.

We're all going to be here together for the next two days,

at the end of which we will be saying goodbye to one of you.

For the first time - you'll hear this a lot in the next two days -

on your marks, get set...

BOTH: Bake.

All the challenges in the bake off have been devised by acclaimed master baker Paul Hollywood

and legendary cookery writer and baker Mary Berry.

As a judge, I'm looking forward to having really interesting detailed recipes

and, of course, they've got to taste just as good as they look.

Mary and I want to find out who is the best amateur baker in this country,

and the way to do that, following from the last series, is to up the ante,

and that is exactly what we've done.

Their first challenge requires the bakers to achieve

consistency of size, texture and flavour across 24 individual cupcakes.

They're allowed to create up to two varieties,

and each one of them must be perfectly decorated

and feature sponge and icing of different but complementary flavours.

Every one of them must be ready to be judged in two hours.

At home, normally I've got all the time I need, really,

so I just meander into the kitchen and start baking,

and then it's finished when it's finished.

Jo lives in Essex and is a wife, mother and, at 41,

the youngest grandmother in the competition.

She's making her family's favourite chocolate and orange cupcakes.

- Do you like cooking for your family?
- I love it, yeah.

- Do you find it frustrating when all you get is a grunt?
- Yeah.

Well, mine actually mark me out of ten.

And they find it really amusing to mark me really low.

- Jo, I'm not having that.
- No.
- So you cook a meal for them?

- Yes, and they go, "One out of ten".
- No!

- Or three, maybe six. Sometimes I feel like putting their head in the dinner.
- Yeah!

The base for a traditional cupcake sponge is made by creaming butter and sugar...

- What?
- ..then gradually adding beaten eggs, then flour.

This is me being neat, not me being untidy!

But the fats in these ingredients are prone to reject each other...

No! It curdled with the last egg.

..emulsifying the batter, rendering it lumpy and unusable.

If the eggs aren't the same temperature as the butter, it ends up separating.

But what you can do is add a tiny bit of the flour and it should be OK.

25-year-old Rob works as a photographer,

but dreams of becoming a professional baker in Paris.

A keen innovator, his cupcakes feature a fresh blackberry juice and vanilla sponge

with Pernod icing and a unique topping.

- Is that liquorice there?
- It is.

I'm going to cut it up fine and grate a bit on the top.

And then the icing, you use this alcohol as well as the liquorice?

I reduce it and then the liquorice is to finish it off.

- Have you been practising?
- I've practised with the liquorice,

but I haven't mastered it.

When we say "signature bake, tried and tested"...

- When we say "tried and tested"...
- You haven't tested it.
- I have a bit.

The bakers are free to add whatever ingredients they wish

to their toppings and sponges.

I'm just trying not to cut my hand while I grate and chop.

But altering the consistency of their batter

by adding fruit or liquid at this stage is risky.

- Get a basic batter, that's fair enough.
- Yeah.

- But if you're adding liquid, make your batter slightly thicker.
- Yeah.

- Do you add more flour to combat it?
- More flour.

Or less egg. Then you can compensate when you add the rest of the stuff.

- But you've made these before, presumably.
- I have, loads of times.

40-year-old marketing manager Urvashi

is a self-taught baker and mother of two. She met her husband in the Far East,

the inspiration for her cherry blossom and Japanese lime cupcakes.

It's going to have lime zest in the base

to kind of just bring out the colour of the yuzu.

Yuzu is an East Asian citrus fruit

whose juice is widely used in Japanese cooking.

These come into season in winter,

and we used to pickle them and have them as a cool drink in the summer.

- Yeah.
- It's so amazing.
- It's very aromatic, isn't it?

- I'm not doing anything else.
- It's a cross between a mandarin and a lime.

Rugby roach Simon has opted for a less subtle addition to his batter.

At the moment I'm heating together caster sugar,

Guinness and dark chocolate,

then I'm going to mix in egg whites and creme fraiche,

so it's fairly straightforward.

The 31-year-old ex-RAF officer lives in Norfolk with his wife and two sons,

but his signature cupcakes are more suited to his mates at the rugby club -

a Guinness and chocolate sponge topped with Bailey's and cream cheese frosting.

I'm a Guinness fan at heart, and it does work well with the recipe,

so they don't object.

Filling cupcake cases correctly is an art.

The bakers have to be able to anticipate

how far their batters will rise.

Over-filling will create an unacceptable mushroom top.

Because everyone's putting me off.

Under-filling produces a small, dry, over-baked sponge.

It won't help me, panicking.

Tapping helps to remove any trapped air bubbles,

which can balloon in the oven, ruining a cupcake's appearance.

I'm weighing cupcake mixture like a crazy woman at the moment.

I would never, ever do this at home.

31-year-old Holly lives in Leicester with her husband and two children.

She's honed her baking skills whilst on maternity leave,

and aims to impress with 12 cupcakes inspired by the Bakewell tart

and 12 ginger cupcakes with homemade fig truffles.

It's obviously a bit nuts to weigh mixture before it's cooked,

but because it's a competition and I want all the cakes to be the same size,

then that's what I'm doing.

Where did my timer go?

Where DID my timer go?

- 15 minutes.
- Say a little prayer.

To find out more about the history of cupcakes,

I've come to the beautiful Audley End House, Essex.

Conkers, hopscotch, having your head flushed down the toilet,

they're all classic childhood memories for me.

But nothing beats my recollection of the first fairy cake I ever baked,

which for so many kids is the original point of entry into the glorious world of baking.

Fairy cakes, or cupcakes as they're also known,

were first made in the kitchens of these vast stately homes,

but would never have been possible

without the use of an unusual piece of kitchen kit.

So, Annie, what is this unusual piece of kit?

I'm thinking sponge catapult. No?

Not really. What you're looking at is something as simple as the teacup.

- So this is literally why they're called cupcakes?
- Yes. There are two arguments.

One is simply this, they're baked in cups,

and the other is that the recipe often includes cups of things,

so it will often be a cup of sugar, a cup of flour, a cup of butter.

How did servants get their hands on crockery like that?

Like anything, cups go out of fashion, so upstairs they're drinking from tea bowls.

Then they start to get handled cups.

The tea bowls evolved down the household until they reached the kitchen.

The cook may well be drinking tea out of them,

and she looks for something to bake a small cake in,

throws in the mixture, and hey presto! A ready-made mould.

One of the first published cake in a cup recipes

was written by the famous British cook Maria Rundell in 1806.

Her Queen cake contains three cups each of flour, sugar

currants, butter and some very frothy eggs.

I've expended less calories in a fitness DVD than I'm doing now.

I'm presuming that all this exertion is to create

- a lightness of touch that'll be enjoyed upstairs.
- Absolutely.

This is the era where what we now know as the fairy cake is really invented,

and it's called a fairy cake precisely because it's so light.

So we're going to mix our well-whisked egg yolks in with our butter.

Now, at what point are aprons invented, because it may be time?

- I think we've got a strong argument to suggest way back in the medieval period.
- Let's do it.

Then we're going to mix in our egg whites,

and add in the dry ingredients, folding them in,

so what we end up with is something that's nice and light and airy

and will rise very well because of the whisking.

Then we're going to fill them about two thirds full,

- because they will rise.
- Let's bake.

Fairy cakes' popularity really took off as afternoon tea became more fashionable.

This tea house bridge was specially designed for ladies

to enjoy beautiful views and eat lots of small cakes.

Marvellous.

I want to see the results!

They've been in the oven for about 30 minutes.

Look at that. Perfection, though I say so myself.

That is all your beating.

Yes, thank you. Look how light that is!

It's beautiful, curranty, sugary, light, eggy goodness.

So did afternoon tea make these sorts of cakes more popular?

Very much so. Yes. The Georgian period is all about taste and gentility and refinement

and civilisation, and showing ourselves to be one of the most civilised nations on Earth.

So small cakes really are very useful,

both in terms of having something that's the right size

in proportion to the tea cup, but also having something

that isn't going to be unladylike in terms of what you're eating.

So you're saying all this gentility, this refinement,

all created by this shape and this drinking utensil.

- Absolutely.
- Cheers.

SUE SLURPS

- That's how they did it, isn't it?
- SHE LAUGHS

'One hour to go in the signature cupcake challenge.'

I want them to go brown, but they're not going brown,

and I keep turning it up a little notch.

'Oven timing for cupcakes is critical.'

I'm so scared to leave them in there too long.

'Their small size means the margin for error is tiny.'

It would be a couple of minutes.

'As little as one minute either side of the optimum time can produce

'an underdone, doughy texture or dry them out completely.

'They must also remember to turn them

'to make sure the batch is baked evenly.'

Whoops. Note to self -

don't poke the uncooked cupcake, because it will sink!

If this thing's right, it says they're baked.

Technology wouldn't be wrong, would it?

When you do it at home, it doesn't matter if it doesn't work, you know.

People eat them anyway.

Here, I've got the queen of cooking tasting them, so, you know,

if they don't work out, she's going to say, "What on earth are you doing here?

- "Get lost!".
- Liverpudlian and grandmother of three, Janet,

is never without a home-baked cake in her house.

For her signature cupcakes, she's miniaturised her favourite recipe

for fresh raspberries and cream cake.

- Looking very flippety-flop.
- They're looking flippety-flop?

- Don't look, please.
- It's a bit late for that. Was the batter quite a wet mix?

- It was quite liquid.
- Get them out of there as soon as you can,

put them on a cool surface as quickly as possible.

The cool surface will prevent them from dropping,

because you're rapidly cooling off the inside.

Did you add baking powder to these?

- I did.
- Sometimes, if you use too much baking powder,

it rises up and then drops down again.

Yeah. Well, it was the recipe.

I don't normally make cupcakes because I normally make just one great big cake for the masses.

Has the pressure got to you? Are you feeling nervous?

Well, I wasn't until these came out! No.

They look great in there. Hope they don't sink at the last minute, like they sometimes do.

Am I ready like Freddy? In a Chevy on the levee, drinking a bevvie...

19-year-old engineering student, Jason, is from Croydon

and is a passionate member of his university's baking society.

He's baking 12 lemon meringue cupcakes and 12 apple and cinnamon cupcakes

with a technically challenging topping that he hopes will impress.

I'm separating my eggs, half for the meringue and half for the creme patissiere.

'A creme patissiere is a cooled custard created by carefully adding beaten eggs, sugar and flour

'to milk infused with fresh vanilla or extract.'

- Ooh, this stuff is potent, boy.
- 'The mixture must be continuously stirred over a moderate heat.

'This warms the fat, causing the mixture to thicken,

'making it suitable as a filling or topping.

'Too much heat can cook the eggs, creating a lumpy, useless mess.'

Is there a reason why you didn't use vanilla pods?

I've never used them before because none of my family bakes on this level and stuff.

You see it on TV, and they're either expensive or just...

I'm used to vanilla extract, and this has got seeds in it so it has the look.

Are you a bit scared of the judges?

You want to make Mary proud and you want to prove what you can do.

- Is that what the relationship is?
- That's what it is.

- So Mary is almost like your mum.
- You want her to be proud of you.

- You want her to just...
- Yeah, yeah.
- ..to not be disappointed.

Mary's disappointment is the worst thing, isn't it?

- Oh, yes.
- Like a bucket of cold water.

31-year-old graphic designer, Ben,

was taught to bake by his grandmother,

but it's Mary he hopes to impress with his rhubarb and custard and "After Dinner" cupcakes.

I've got one lot done and ready to go.

I'm just waiting to do the ganache on top of the mint ones

and I've probably got about 20 minutes to spare, hopefully.

Lady bakers and gent bakers, you've got 15 minutes left.

I've never iced this fast before.

I'm just making a butter cream, so I'll give it another little whizz

and then start adding a huge amount of icing sugar to it.

And some booze.

'But alcohol is just the beginning of Simon's final presentation.'

- What is this?
- This is my cake stand.
- So how does it work?

Each one just sits on its own lolly stick?

No, they get pierced - cut in the bottom and then pushed on.

The cupcakes will be iced and look like a bowl of flowers

and then I'll put rose leaves in between.

- Like that.
- Yes!
- I'm never going to live this down at the rugby club!

Rob, what gives? Oh, it's a dejected Rob!

- It is a dejected Rob.
- No! Why a dejected Rob?

They didn't go right. These ones didn't rise, they just flopped out.

You're basically trimming off the excess round the sides.

They don't look anywhere near as good as I thought they would.

That's because you're a perfectionist. The beauty is not only in the eye of the beholder,

but also in the digestive tract of the beholder, so...

'Rob isn't the only baker facing presentation issues.'

I don't know how this is working.

'Urvashi was hoping to create piped chocolate chop sticks.'

It seems to be clogged up.

It might have been because I let the chocolate go too cold,

so I'm going to start again.

I think it is a little bit of the nerves playing up.

Normally, baking is my calm, relaxing, quiet time, distressing activity.

Not wanting to stress anyone out remotely,

but you do have ten minutes left, bakers.

Are you winning?

- Hope so.
- I'm fascinated now to see how it's going to turn out.

Some of these people are getting into too much technical detail, trying to get too many flavours in.

Simple is often the best way.

The moment those cakes come out of the oven, they're either all right or they're not,

and they've got to make the most of them. This is what happens in baking.

Oh, look at that. Oh. Magnificent!

The problem is, the cupcake is not just the sponge,

but you can either mess it up or make it even more beautiful with the topping that you put on.

- Ah!
- Oh, hang on, hang on.

Got to love them.

OK, that's time up. Put away your piping bags.

Step away from the royal icing. It's judging time.

(Yes! Ah, ah, ah.)

These bakers are more accustomed to having their baking judged by their friends and family

than two of the country's leading professionals.

- Hello, Jo.
- Hi, there, hi.

Don't they just look pretty?

We're always looking for this sort of, "gosh!" factor.

And that is just so inviting, isn't it?

- You'd be proud to put them in any shop to sell them.
- Thank you.

- There you are.
- Beautiful.
- It does look good.

I made a drizzle with granulated sugar and some orange juice

so hopefully you should get a bit of that running through.

That is delicious. The orange lightens things up.

- Yeah.
- You've got two great bakes.

The topping, the flavours, the appearance, sublime.

- Oh, thank you so much.
- It is very, very, very good.

I don't think I've ever heard him say that word on this show.

- And I'm about to take his temperature.
- Yes!

It's a mess.

- The meringue and the...?
- And the apple, yeah.

It hasn't worked.

- The taste without the meringue is delicious.
- Thank you.

The apple and cinnamon just really beautifully balanced.

But what a shame that top didn't have a bit more of a finesse.

Lovely flavour, but then we come to the top.

Forgive me being rude, but it looks a bit like a stuffed olive.

Or an eyeball, perhaps.

I think this one, delicious. It's so fresh.

- It is.
- The fruit going through it really lifts it up.

I think, visually, they look amazing.

It's very doughy. It's sticking to the roof of my mouth.

This is a nice finish.

- I think they look stunning.
- Your piping is perfect.

With a cupcake, so often there's so much on top.

All that icing, so sickly.

- There's nothing sickly about this at all.
- No.

Now, that's rather clever. That's the raspberry jam in the middle.

A nice light sponge round the outside.

- It's delicious, absolutely delicious.
- Thank you.

- Different.
- It's a bouquet.

- It is.
- It's a bouquet of cupcakes.
- Thought I'd give it a go.

I don't...

- ..I don't like it.
- I don't like it. It is quite heavy.

- Heavy flavour, not heavy texture.
- OK, yeah.

Guinness, use one, chocolate, use another,

chocolate and Guinness, you're in a hiding for nothing.

- Think about your flavour combinations in future.
- OK.
- (Just going to take this one...)

I think the banoffee pie is delicious.

You've got lots of flavours going on.

A very clever idea to have the crumb crust.

It's sad, it's a bit of a disaster, really, isn't it?

- It is, yes, afraid so.
- They went down in the middle when they were in the oven.

The flavour is not very distinctive, the lemon icing needs more lemon.

The taste of the lemon is very, very good.

Appearance-wise, too simple.

If you take all the fruit away

and leave one of those on their own.

Also, you must be able to eat the decoration,

- and I'm not sure whether you should eat orchids.
- No.

These should be boozy, shouldn't they? If I remember rightly.

They will probably be a bit boozy.

The liquorice very much comes through, and the Pernod.

It's a very unusual combination and, like Marmite,

- you'll either like it or loathe it.
- I'm in the camp, I hate it.

- Paul hates it.
- I really...

I thought one of you would be in the camp.

- To be honest with you, it's disgusting.
- Paul!

It's sitting in my mouth. It's bitter on my tongue.

- The icing tastes OK, but you need to practise with your icing guide.
- Yeah.

I could've dropped that in from a five-foot height and ended up with that finish.

- Must try harder.
- Noted.

- I'm a fan of the Pernod, Rob.
- Thanks.

Looks nice sponge inside, and light.

It's lovely and sharp and what goes better with rhubarb than cream?

Two great bakes, and the flavours are so delicate.

You've got lovely tart rhubarb, you've got the mint coming through, and it's very, very, very good.

Ben, Holly and Jo have already staked their claim to become this week's star baker.

But Rob, Janet and Simon must improve to avoid an early exit

from the Great British Bake Off.

I think it was a risk doing what I did, but it wouldn't have

been my baking, or my style of baking, if I'd played safe.

I'm feeling a little bit more confident but, you know,

I don't want to get ahead of myself.

Their expectations are obviously higher than my friends' and my family!

After the individual flare of the signature bake,

the second challenge is a controlled technical bake,

allowing the judges to directly compare the bakers' ability.

Coming up now is possibly the moment that you've been dreading.

It's our first technical challenge of the series.

Now, this challenge is performed blind, which means we're going to ask the judges to leave.

Paul and Mary, you cannot see who is baking what.

The technical bake is a controlled test of both your intuition

and your ability.

You are going to be baking something you have no idea about,

and what you are going to be creating

is the bete noire of bakers -

it's a Battenberg cake.

Not just any old Battenberg cake, but a coffee and walnut Battenberg cake.

The judges are going to be looking for the perfect sponge

which holds its form, perfect symmetry, distinctive flavours

and also a very lovely smooth exterior.

And as if the pressure was not intense enough already, bakers,

you are going to be working to one of Mary Berry's -

that's Queen Mary Berry's - own recipes.

So, with that in mind, on your marks, get set, bake.

All the bakers have been given the same recipe.

It contains a full list of ingredients and measurements and a basic method.

Some details are missing and it's down to the bakers' instinct

and experience to deliver a Battenberg worthy of Mary Berry's classic interpretation.

OK, Mary, can I reveal...

- Come on.
- ..your gorgeous Battenberg?

- That looks lovely.
- Right, there it is, in all its glory

The history of this most famous of British cakes

began on the Isle of Wight in the 19th century

at Osborne House, the private residence of Queen Victoria.

Queen Victoria's favourite granddaughter, Princess Victoria,

fell in love with her first cousin once removed,

Prince Louis of Battenberg. They'd known each other since children.

As they grew older, they became increasingly devoted

to each other, and it was at Osborne House where the romance flourished.

When the engagement was announced, in early 1884,

the bakers of London decided to make a celebration cake

for the wedding, and it would be a Battenberg cake.

The Battenberg elevated British cake-making to new heights.

Layered with rich sponge, sugary jam and marzipan,

the cake was packed with flavour and sported a new design.

The most startling feature about Battenberg is always the colours,

and it was thought to be to reflect the romance of the wedding,

the pink, the pastel, the pale yellows. There were four squares,

each to honour one of the Battenberg princes -

Prince Alexander, Prince Francis Joseph, Prince Henry

and, of course, Prince Louis.

It's most likely that, if this cake was created in London, it was created in Whitechapel.

Most of the bakers in Whitechapel were German anyway,

so it's quite funny because we've taken the credit for this cake being a British cake,

but actually it was most likely created by a German baker for a German prince.

The Battenberg cake's link to the British monarchy is as strong today as when it was first created.

In 1947, our Queen Elizabeth II was married to her Prince Philip,

who just happens to be a direct descendant of the Battenberg family.

But can these 12 amateur bakers do justice to 125 years

of British baking history in just two hours?

I've never made a Battenberg before, no.

I have made a coffee and walnut cake before,

but I don't like coffee so I don't know how it was. It looked good.

I know what it is because Dot in EastEnders likes to make them for Jim.

The bakers have been given just one tin to bake both the vanilla

- and the coffee and walnut sponges.
- I'm going to have to just hope.

It must be perfectly lined to bake two identical sponges simultaneously.

"Put the paper in half with the fold on the inner side.

"Open up the paper and push up the centre fold to make a 4cm pleat."

That's not going to work.

It's completely new territory for me. Not used to all this origami effort.

31-year-old Keith lives in Bedfordshire

and began baking after deciding to leave his job in the City to become

a full-time house husband and stay-at-home dad to his baby son, Alfie.

- Battenberg, Keith. Are you familiar?
- Nervous.

- Are you familiar?
- I haven't got a clue. I feel like Arsene Wenger!

It's like one game at a time, working my way through.

Do you know why you shouldn't think like him?

You'll end up second or third in this contest! You won't win.

To create the basic Battenberg sponge,

the bakers have to combine butter, sugar, eggs and flour.

The tin was the most problematic, I think.

The cake should be OK.

Over-mixing will trap too much air in the mixture...

..air that will expand too much in the oven,

only to contract as it cools, causing the cake to sink,

making a symmetrical finish impossible.

Worried that it won't give me enough rise, but I'll see what happens.

To create the distinctive chequerboard design,

one half of the mixture must be coloured and flavoured with coffee.

I like experimenting and making my own recipes,

but I would much rather follow a Mary Berry recipe.

I'm good at following recipes, I think.

45-year-old Mary-Anne lives with her husband, Robert,

and daughter, Sasha, in Kidderminster.

She's represented Wales in women's rugby,

and has now brought all of her competitive spirit to baking.

I think I should go in search of more coffee.

It's not a very definite taste, so...

There's something very '70s about that taste.

It's a mild coffee flavour, which think that suits the Battenberg vibe.

- I shall let it sit and see if it develops a bit.
- OK.

- That was very cheffy, wasn't it? "Develops a bit."
- Exactly!

I put all the coffee in the cake instead of half in the cake and half for the icing, so I don't know.

It'll probably have a stronger flavour, but the judges wanted strong flavour

- so I'm sure they'll like it.
- With weighing and mixing complete,

the bakers now need to plan how long their sponges need to bake for.

But also allow enough time for cooling and decoration.

I think having a military background does help to some extent,

following specific things to do.

It does make up for the fact that I'm a man, and multi-tasking is a nightmare.

I nearly had a stroke when I heard it was Battenberg.

I've always wanted to make a Battenberg,

and I thought what a good time to try!

So, under pressure while being filmed.

When he isn't baking, 40-year-old Ian works as a fund-raiser

for the Royal Academy of Arts.

He lives in Dunstable with his partner, Stefan, and their Cocker Spaniel, Monty.

He's been baking since he was a boy

when he realised that his mum couldn't.

- It's an anti-stress thing, this, isn't it?
- It is.
- I'll join you.

Even if I don't use them, I'm doing something with the time.

Do you feel the pressure's on because you're doing one of Mary's recipes?

Oh, God, yeah. You can't prepare. What would you do,

- go through every one of Mary's books and practise everything?
- No.

Please work.

As long as mine don't sink down... Yeah, boy!

- Otherwise I'm out of here.
- Little bit disappointed, actually.

My foil's curled over, so it's split away from the side.

Hopefully I'll be able to rescue that with some marzipan.

I'm actually quite happy with that.

It'll be fine.

I need to let the cakes chill. They have to be cold before I put this on.

The Battenbergs must be finished with a precisely measured amount of coffee butter cream.

Bingo jingo.

It bonds the four sponge sections together

and ensures that the marzipan stays stuck to the side of the cake.

- I don't like Battenberg.
- Really? Why not?

- It's got marzipan on it.
- Do you not like it?

I've never made one, I've never eaten one.

43-year-old housewife and WI member Yasmin lives in the Wirral

with her husband and three children. When she's not baking, she spends her time learning new hobbies,

including photography and burlesque dancing.

It's interesting that you're cooking something you don't like.

Maybe that's a good thing because it gives you a bit of distance from it.

You won't be emotionally tied up with it.

- I can be like one of my children and just pick the outside off.
- Yes!

OK, that's 15 minutes, everyone.

You should think about getting that marzipan on.

The Berry is coming.

It's going to be cut in two, into kind of long square shapes.

Not as perfect as I'd want them to be. That one's really not good.

You do one and one, and the alternate one, don't you?

It's quite difficult to get the butter cream on because the cake keeps crumbling.

It's a bit like brick-laying.

I'm using cling-wrap here

- because I didn't want the marzipan to stick to the roller.
- No, that didn't work.

I'm using these two wooden handles to try

and get the marzipan an even width.

The moment of truth.

With some judicious encouragement, it can be persuaded to wrap round.

Rubbish.

Is it going to match?!

That'll be at the bottom, so they won't see that!

No, start again.

Stupid.

I'm hoping that it's all going to stay together.

Much better.

OK! That's time up.

So if you'd like to bring your Battenberg booty here,

put it just behind the picture of yourself.

The judging for the technical bake is unique.

Paul and Mary will have no idea whose cake is whose.

Well...what an array of Battenbergs.

The strict rules of the technical bake are about to reveal

who has a future in the Bake Off and who will have

to up their game in the final challenge.

So, over to the first one.

- This is interesting.
- Well...

- Where's the butter cream?
- It seems to have disappeared at the end.

It didn't rise enough, and if it had risen just a little bit more,

- we would have a taller, squarer cake.
- It's flatter.

- You can't see what the Battenberg is.
- The whole idea of a Battenberg

- is to be able to see that chequerboard at the end.
- Oh, dear.

The marzipan is rather too thick.

- It's very yellow, this one, isn't it?
- It would be the egg yolks.

It's a good flavour. It's slightly drier than the others.

It is slightly drier. This is dinky.

And it's been really well pressed into shape.

- It looks very neat...
- It looks very pretty.
- ..and businesslike.

Now, this one is absolutely massive!

It's rather difficult to believe that you all had the same recipe.

Somebody's been beating very hard.

- There's hardly any butter cream at all.
- It's neat.

- There's butter cream in there.
- This person has followed

the recipe exactly.

This one, again, has been totally encased.

This looks a very neat, tidy person, well trimmed.

This is another rectangular one.

No butter cream round the outside again.

As you can see here, it's a generous amount.

It's sticking the squares together, but none left for the outside.

It's very strong coffee.

It's very strong coffee. Marzipan's very neat.

This has been well trimmed. It looks perfection.

- It's good flavour, good bake.
- A very good execution.

And finally, the last one.

It's a little uneven,

the marzipan round the outside, but it is beautifully thin.

- Now we have to decide.
- We do.

Paul and Mary must now rank all of the Battenbergs

from the worst to the best.

The bakers' position in this challenge could prove crucial

to their chance of staying in the competition.

Our decision has been made, and in 12th place

is this one. Whose is this?

It needed cutting into a square, not a rectangle,

needed a lot more butter cream on the inside.

And the next one is...

It's me, unfortunately.

Rather too much marzipan.

10th place is this one.

- Whose is that?
- And who is this one here?

Marzipan is not stuck down at all.

- In fact, it's flying in the wind.
- And in 8th place is this person.

Janet, it needed more butter cream round the outside.

Again, it's rectangular and we wanted it square.

Urvashi, Jason, Yasmin and Mary-Anne have all done enough

to keep themselves out of danger.

Now we're coming to the proper shaped ones.

This one has achieved the right shape,

and it certainly had the right flavour. Well done.

Number two is this one. Well done.

And who has this one here?

- This is a masterpiece.
- Well done, Holly.
- APPLAUSE

I'm feeling very smiley, tired but very, very smiley and happy,

and relieved.

I'm feeling elated, compared to last time.

Top three, I didn't even think I'd do that, but brilliant.

- So buzzing.
- I'm still quite optimistic, you know.

I still feel that, you know, not all is lost.

Tomorrow, my biggest focus, I think, is going to be praying

that Lady Luck's on my side and that something goes well for me.

I might even be relying on a bit luck that something went bad for someone else.

Just one more challenge remains in this week's Bake Off,

a final chance for the bakers to convince Paul and Mary

that they have what it takes to remain in the competition.

I thought Holly really did wonders.

She was top of the class, both times.

Joanne, her cupcakes were so professional.

She then fell flat on her face with the Battenberg.

- She had a terrible one, didn't she?
- Keith didn't do very well.

He came bottom in the Battenberg and he wasn't too good in the cupcakes.

Janet didn't impress you with the cupcakes.

- They weren't done, they sunk.
- She's already said to us big cakes are her forte.

And also Rob, with the liquorice cupcakes.

- The liquorice didn't work.
- It didn't go down very well with either of you.
- No.

Then on the Battenberg he was in the top quarter!

- He did well, but that showed his skill.
- Simon's Guinness thing didn't work on any level,

and he was also in the bottom third of the Battenbergs.

It'll be interesting to see who raises their game and who buckles.

Good morning, bakers.

Now, we have the Showstopper Challenge -

jazz hands are not mandatory - where you're going to be creating a tiered celebration cake.

The judges are looking for brilliant ideas,

elaborate multi-layered designs and, most important of all,

it's got to taste as good as it looks.

- So, what for one of you will be final time, on your marks, get set.
- Bake!

The Showstopper Challenge is the ultimate test

of ingenuity and creativity under immense time pressure.

Not only have they got to make two or three cakes baked to perfection...

..they've got to go beyond anything they've done before.

They've got to decorate it, a sugar paste, a fondant, a ganache.

We're looking for a really high standard.

Then they've got to think of the finesse,

the little bits to make that cake go, "Wow, that is amazing."

The cakes must be baked, cooled, stacked and fully decorated

in just five hours.

Today's more of a fun day for me.

I've done the cake a lot of times, I enjoy working with chocolate.

I'll be more relaxed, should be a different me!

Rob needs to impress with his two-tiered chocolate showstopper,

filled with fresh chocolate mousse, covered in a dark chocolate ganache,

and finished with a cracked tempered chocolate decoration.

'I'm doing a Genoise sponge and you add butter in the end.'

'A Genoise is a technically daunting variation on a standard sponge cake

'that forms the basis for most French patisserie.

'It contains no raising agents and the cake gets its rise and unique

'texture through heating the eggs and sugar over a moderate heat

'and then whisking them until enough air has been trapped to triple the batter's volume.

'This then has to be slowly folded into flour.'

I'm worried about the chocolate,

- I don't know how it will turn out, but...
- I'm worried that bowl isn't big enough.

- Yeah, I've never done with this amount of mixture before.
- Yeah, I guessed, I guessed.

'All the bakers have to produce at least two perfectly baked sponges.

'Mary-Anne has set herself an even tougher challenge.'

It's a cake of many layers. Rather than bake one big cake and then slice it into layers,

I'm making very thin layers and assembling them into a cake.

She's attempting an Opera cake, which is traditionally square and

features at least five extremely thin layers of sponge, filling and icing.

So how many layers are we talking about, in total?

Four sponge, two buttercream, that's six, a ganache...

- Seven.
- ..And the mirror glaze, eight.

- Wowzers!
- This really is difficult!

To think that this is the very first programme

- and we're getting this very exciting cake.
- I hope I'm not peaking too early.

'Simon is hoping to book his place in the next round by dazzling with what's inside his cake.'

I hope it'll be enough to impress them. It's usually better the third day,

but, from experience, these cakes never last three days anyway.

He's recreating his mum's recipe for courgette and chocolate cake

and topping it with fresh fruit and vanilla buttercream icing.

The courgettes go in here, similar to what you do in a carrot cake.

It adds moisture without an overpowering flavour.

Yeah, I thought it was strange when my mum gave me the recipe a few years ago, but it works well.

'Most of the bakers have chosen chocolate as a key ingredient in their tiered showstopper cakes,

'and some are attempting to use it in its elusive tempered form.'

I think it makes it stronger but I don't do chocolate very often, so I'm hoping it works.

'Tempering is a process that must be done in advance

'and aims to produce perfect crystallisation in melted chocolate.'

It is quite a skilled thing to do. I've managed it successfully a few times.

I hope today will be one of them.

'The fats in cocoa butter can crystallise in six different forms.

'Just one, the so-called seed crystal,

'results in the shiny flexible chocolate that can be used for

'decorations and collars to wrap around cakes.'

Don't know the intricacies of these things.

'To create seed crystals,

'chocolate must be heated over water to exactly 45 Celsius.'

At home, I just shove it in the microwave, you know.

'Then it must be cooled to 27 Celsius whilst stirring continuously.'

How can you wait to eat it?

'Finally, it must be manipulated as it cools on a flat surface.'

- I think it's going to be OK.
- 'Only this process will provide a glossy finish and crisp texture.'

You can leave that to set and then get a knife and cut through the plastic,

so you end up with strips of chocolate on plastic.

- You can then pick up that chocolate, and the plastic...
- Is this the first...?

..wrap it round a cake and take the plastic off.

The chocolate adheres to the cake and gives you a smooth finish.

Only Jo is attempting to go one better.

Actually, it's better than I hoped for.

She's attempting a polka dot white and milk chocolate collar

for her two-tiered chocolate and fresh strawberry cake.

I've got a ribbon and things I want to put round it and a brooch.

I wanted to keep it quite simple, but famous last words.

'Three hours to go in the final challenge.'

Well, we've all seen how tough it is baking for the judges.

But imagine if you were asked to bake a cake for the Prime Minister.

Sir Winston Churchill: 'We shall fight in the fields and in the streets.

'We shall fight in the hills.

- 'We shall never surrender!'
- Our great wartime leader, Winston Churchill,

sending out a stern warning to any country that dared pick a fight with us.

What you might not know is that Winston Churchill himself was the cause of a great conflict here,

on British soil - The Battle of the Cake Bakers.

Churchill's status as Prime Minister made every birthday a national event.

He'd receive thousands of telegrams and cards.

Downing Street would be packed with well-wishers and, year after year,

the country's best bakers would fight for the right to bake Churchill's cake.

Now, there are only a handful of people left who've had

the honour of baking this prized cake, but I found one of them in Essex,

in the heart of Winston Churchill's old constituency.

84 year-old Mike Tomkins was just 26

when he was selected to bake our wartime leader's 80th birthday cake.

The family bakery in South Woodford is now run by son, Chris,

and is still going strong.

So you got the call to make the cake.

Yes, one of the shop girls passed the message on, and I just didn't believe it.

So I had to return the call, and then I found out it was real.

- You thought it was somebody winding you up.
- Yes, that's right.

I then had to think very hard about what sort of cake I would make Winston Churchill.

To me, it became an obvious solution to have an octagonal cake,

eight sides, to demonstrate achievements that Churchill had made in his 80 years.

And what are these different designs showing?

- There's his hat and cigar.
- The trademark.

And, of course, his famous V-sign.

What's this over here, Mike? There's a trowel.

- Oh, yes, he was a bricklayer as well, in his garden.
- Really?

Oh, yes, he was a competent bricklayer

- So a lot of work creating these designs.
- A lot of work, yes.

- What an achievement.
- Well, I felt proud to have been given the chance to do it,

because he is the man of the century without a doubt.

Mike's cake recipe is as traditionally British as Churchill himself.

Laced with treacle, spices and dried fruit,

soaked in Winston's favourite tipple.

- Shall we add a bit more whisky, Mike?
- Just a little.

- A little? How much, Mike?
- Go on, I'll tell you.
- OK.

Oh, hello. More than that?

- Now, enough.
- SHE LAUGHS

Do you need any help with that bit, Chris?

- Do you need me to...?
- Well, as long as no fingers go in it.

I'm very excited.

Mike personally delivered the original cake to Churchill on his 80th birthday,

so this reproduction is a true slice of history.

- That's absolutely gorgeous.
- Mm.

Is this bringing back memories?

Oh, it's unbelievable when you look back on it all.

I've always said, it's my only claim to fame. Peak of my life.

No question.

Here's to Winston himself.

- Yeah.
- Cheers.
- Cheers.

- There's enough booze in there to have a toast, isn't there?
- Yes.

- Mm.
- Ooh.

Yeah, I'm very happy with that one, yeah.

I'm hoping that's not liquid something inside. Nothing I can do now. Point of no return!

Janet's future in the Bake Off could rest on her two-tiered dark chocolate marble cake,

topped with handmade chocolate truffles.

- How did you make these?
- Just a usual sponge, sort of thing.

Then knifed in 200 grams of melted dark chocolate.

That's very effective. It's come out really well.

'While their sponges are cooling, most of the bakers have

'moved on to preparing their toppings and fillings.'

- I'm in my element, kneading sugar paste. It's brilliant. I love it.
- Good lad.
- It's therapeutic.

I feel like I'm back at home.

Keith is creating a two-tiered chocolate cake,

inspired by his son Alfie's favourite television programme.

- A lighter green goes on the base, which is, if you like, the land.
- Mm.

Slightly darker green at the top, tunnel inside, trains coming through the tunnels.

Are you going to have a tunnel, a real tunnel?

Well, not a real, real tunnel, but...

- But a tunnel of cake.
- Yeah.

Yeah.

OK, bakers, just 30 minutes left.

Just time to smear that last blob of ganache on.

I'm just layering up with the chocolate butter cream,

and ganache, and then I'm going to trim it so that it looks stunning instead of like a dog's breakfast.

This is about as complicated as I wanted to get. I didn't want to go throwing in,

having to temper chocolate and do flowers and stuff.

It's not worked.

Get my hands washed.

The chocolate didn't set properly so I had to rescue it and put a panel on it,

so I'm going to try and work panels round the whole outside,

just to give it... I like that sheen better.

I can only do what I can do in the time I've got, so we'll see what happens.

Ben aims to produce the tallest cake in the final challenge,

a three-tiered vanilla sponge cake covered in air-brushed sugar paste icing.

I'm trying to get it on and done and.

You're the make-up artist to all the sponge cakes. When they need perfection they call for you.

'Before they can finish their final decorations, the bakers have to face stacking their tiers.'

They're ordinary drinking straws, but they're quite good for this.

'A process that even professionals fear.'

They give you a bit of support for the top tiers to sit on.

'Straws or dowling must be used to create a foundation for each tier.'

This is a bit of butter cream. It just sticks them together to stop them sliding around.

It should stay neatly on top.

OK, bakers, 15 minutes.

My hands are shaking. Phew!

Yahhh!

THUD Ohh!

BLEEP.

OK... Oh, man, I'm sorry.

Is there anything we can do then?

I think as I was turning it round I kept pushing it a bit,

turning it round, pushing it a bit more, and just pushed it off.

I'm so gutted. So gutted.

I thought it was starting to look really good, as well.

You didn't mean it to happen.

Try and rescue one of those layers.

Hang on. Don't, don't bend it, right?

Hang on. Get your hand there.

Now, you've got one layer, put a layer of chocolate on that now.

A layer of chocolate on it, get it round the side, now.

Poor Rob.

Ladies and gentlemen, it's that time of day, the time for stopping and moving away.

Thankfully, everything went on pretty much as I'd like it to.

We got the colour on there, we got everything on, so,

fingers crossed, it'll taste as good as it looks.

It looks OK from a distance.

If you don't look too close, it looks quite castle-like,

Transylvania castle-like!

I ran out of time and didn't have enough time to do everything I wanted, but it's finished,

I suppose, so I'm happy.

If somebody said to me, "Do you think you're going to be in the competition from now?"

I'd say, "Probably not", actually, because I did abysmally yesterday.

It's a bit of a Pyrrhic victory if I was to beat Rob to the post.

It's like racing against a guy with a broken leg. It's not fair, is it?

For one of these bakers, this will be the last time that they face the judges.

Mary and Paul will taste each cake individually before discussing their final decision away from the bakers.

The brief was, a tiered celebration cake.

What we have here is two layered cakes.

It tastes absolutely divine.

- If I was being very picky I would like to have seen a tempered chocolate somewhere.
- Mm-hm.

..Because that's what you need on an Opera, to go crack and then down.

But that is a very good cake.

- Thank you.
- It tastes delicious.
- Thank you.

I've made and tried lots of courgette cakes,

but this one is quite different and it's very chocolatey.

The icing on it, it needs work, it needs to be smoother,

- and it needs to be set.
- Mm-hm.

I'm not too keen on these because I feel that I would like to have made something.

- Don't buy things to cover up your own mistakes, essentially.
- Yeah.

Mm... There's booze.

Yes.

On the base. Too much?

- Oh, yes, lovely.
- That's fine.

You've had difficulty with the outside.

The interior is fantastic.

It is, in fact, a beautifully baked sponge.

The overall appearance of it, it needs work.

Personally, I would have liked to have seen these being constructed by you.

The actual icing is very good, you've rolled that well.

- It's slightly under-baked.
- It looks...

Mm... It's dropped. It probably needed another five minutes.

Just look at that. It's beautifully marbled.

- I'm scared if it's OK.
- You've got a chocolate butter cream running through it too.

- I have, yeah.
- That's delicious.

The chocolate that's coming through, it's not bitter at all. It's lovely and sweet.

The dark chocolate ganache is very good.

I think the cow's fantastic.

You've got a lovely smooth edge here, too.

Overall, the appearance is very unmistakeable.

But the sponge is a little bland.

I think it's slightly overdone, as well.

- I think more work on the sponge and a little less time on the finish.
- Yes.

- This was a Genoise.
- Yeah.

- And do you know...
- The truffles add to it.
- Exactly.

We haven't had one in the bake off before. It's very tricky.

The taste of that - it's a shame you haven't got the top, to be honest.

The taste of that is divine.

- Absolutely.
- Absolutely gorgeous.

Paul and Mary must now decide who is this week's star baker

and who hasn't done enough to stay in the competition.

Who's really impressed you? Who's your star baker?

I think it's Holly and Jo.

Holly came top in both of the challenges.

She showed her skills, she thought out her recipes, she could go far.

And today, her novelty cake was a little bit awkward.

Jo's sponge today is stunning. But then, on the Battenberg, it all went to pieces.

- So overall?
- I think it's one of those two girls.

Who is looking as if they might be going today?

- I can think of three boys.
- Three boys?

Rob, I wasn't too pleased.

He lost one of the tiers on his cake!

But he was the one that did the Genoise, the most difficult sponge to make.

Keith and Simon are also in a very precarious position.

When you look at Keith, his celebration cake was too simple.

And Simon did the Guinness cake and it really didn't taste very nice.

Well, I've got someone in mind.

I have, too.

- Oh, my heart just started going then.
- It's not you, Mel.

- It's not you.
- Sorry.
- You're not scheduled to go till next week.
- OK.

Bakers, first things first. We want to thank you for all your hard work.

It's been an incredibly tiring weekend, but you have really surpassed yourselves.

Paul and Mary want you to know the standard's been incredibly high.

With that in mind, each week we'll nominate a star baker.

And the person this week who has that accolade is...

Holly. Well done, Holly.

But I'm afraid there is one person among you who hasn't impressed the judges quite enough

to stay with us on the Bake Off.

I'm sorry to say that the person who will not be joining us next week...

is Keith.

Commiserations, Keith. Round of applause.

- Well done.
- Thank you very much, I've had a great time.

'I suppose the only part of me that's sad about leaving today is'

cos I don't want to be the first one who goes, but someone has to be and, you know, it was my time.

It's the way it goes sometimes, isn't it?

'I'm looking forward to getting back to home baking and doing things that I do week in, week out,'

baking breads and pies and, yeah, no more cakes.

- Relieved!
- OMG!

'I'm massively relieved I'm here, just because it was such an uncertain week for me, and so I feel relieved'

that I've got through so that I can show how good I am at other things.

I feel quite pleased, I'm trying to stop myself smiling because I think it can...

I don't want to look smug cos I'm well aware that next week I could be going.

- Are you proud?
- I am, yeah.

'It's lovely to get positive feedback from people, particularly Mary.

'I've been baking her cakes for a long time.'

I don't want to disappoint her now! So I want to keep doing well.

PHONE RINGS

Hello, I've just finished.

And...I'm through to the pastry!

Next time...

- Did you sleep last night?
- I didn't, no.

- 'The bakers tackle tarts.'
- My biggest concern is that my pastry will have a soggy bottom.

Creating their signature quiches.

- It looks a mess.
- Really?
- Yeah.
- OK.

Mary Berry's second technical challenge.

Very nice short pastry.

- 'Tarte au citron.'
- It's shrinking away from the side.

And 24 show-stopping miniature sweet tarts.

Just get it done. Stop messing around and get it in the oven.

But who will become the next star baker?

You can win it one week and be knocked out the next.

And whose Bake Off is about to end?

- Nobody gets an extra chance.
- Her work is just a little bit clumsy.

Oh, no!

The person who will be leaving us this week is...

Oh, sorry!

It's week two in our contest.

Last week we were inadvertently served an upside-down cake on a floor tile.

This week just 11 bakers remain.

Welcome to The Great British Bake Off.

Thousands applied, but just the cream of Britain's best amateur bakers have been chosen for this,

the ultimate test of their baking skills.

I've been practising, everything seems to be on track, so I'm ready to go.

Over the next seven weeks, their baking skills will be scrutinised and judged.

I am definitely a perfectionist.

This isn't just baking - I really want to win!

I'm a pretty emotional person. I get quite upset if things don't go well.



Last week it was cakes...

My hands are shaking. It's getting to the really nervous part.

And Holly was named star baker.

- Stunning.
- Your piping is perfect.

The stress of the Bake Off kitchen resulted in disaster for Rob.

But it was Keith who failed to make the grade and was sent home.

This week, the bakers tackle tarts.

It looks all right, but...God - who knows?!

Very nice short pastry.

- Oh, no...
- And the pressure of pastry is too much for some.

- They won't come out.
- These are not good enough.

Just get it done! Stop messing around and get it in the oven.

But who will last the distance to be crowned the winner of The Great British Bake Off?

Please, please!



It's week two in the search for Britain's best amateur baker, and over the next two days

the bakers will face three increasingly complicated challenges.

They will be quaking in their aprons as we speak,

because this week it's all about tarts - isn't it, Sue?

- Why are you looking at me?
- Don't know.

Tomorrow, one will be crowned this week's star baker.

And someone will have to leave The Great British Bake Off.

Now, your first challenge this weekend is the signature bake,

and this one I'd like to think of as Lorraine's Revenge, because it's quiche time.

You've got two hours to prepare a savoury quiche, encased in your choice of shortcrust pastry.

You'll present your well turned-out quiches to Mary and Paul, who will be looking for

good ingredients, a nice, smooth egg filling, and most important of all, a well-baked pastry case.

No soggy bottoms allowed in this tent!

On your marks...get set...bake!

A quiche is a savoury tart combining various ingredients with a custard filling

thickened with eggs, and baked in an open-topped pastry shell.

The signature challenge requires the bakers to create an original recipe

and produce a quiche of any flavour or size.

It must showcase their creativity and impress the judges -

master baker Paul Hollywood,

and Mary Berry, renowned author of over 60 cookery books.

First of all I'm looking for a good pastry case, evenly baked -

even underneath it should be nice and brown and crisp.

For me, the perfect quiche has to marry up the flavours in the base

with the flavours in the filling.

One thing I can't abide is having too many things going on inside,

too many things going on in the actual pastry -

that is a recipe for disaster.

The bakers begin by making their shortcrust pastry.

Shortcrust is the perfect pastry for tarts, as it's robust and

doesn't rise in the oven, creating a perfect case to hold a filling.

Pastry can be a cruel mistress if you don't treat her well.

I don't actually like quiche so this is a particular challenge for me.

Ian is a self-taught baker who loves to cook with fresh local produce.

He's looking to pack a punch with his stilton,

spinach and new potato quiche.

It's quite a manly quiche.

Now, surely that is a contradiction in terms, a manly quiche.

You need to embrace the femininity.

- No, I'm doing a walnut pastry with a bit of paprika in it, so...
- So you're trying to butch it up.

I'm trying to butch it up a bit, so it's quite a manly quiche if that's possible.

Shortcrust pastry is made with three basic ingredients -

plain flour, liquid and fat, which can be either butter, lard or a mixture of both.

One of the tricks with pastry at this stage is not to overwork it,

or it starts to go a bit gluteny and a bit tart.

Gluten is created when water and flour particles meet.

It's needed to hold the pastry together - but too much of it, and the pastry will become tough.

Working with pastry is actually quite tricky.

If you underwork pastry, it crumbles, it doesn't hold together.

If you overwork it, it goes like rubber. They have to get it perfect.

Just getting the pastry started, it's coming together nicely.

Tent's nice and cold, so nothing's melting yet.

Simon, dad of two and the family cook,

is making a dill-flavoured shortcrust pastry case

for his smoked haddock and watercress quiche.

Feeling a lot more comfortable - securing a place in the second round, that's put my confidence up,

so...just got to turn out a good quiche today and I think I'll be a lot happier.

- Holly, Holly...
- Hello.

- How are you?
- Good. It's all about the green today, isn't it?

- It's all about the green.
- Green top...

Well, off the back of your success last week, how are you going to impress us now?

I'm going to be making a pesto... I guess a pesto-inspired quiche.

You've got a forest of basil over there.

I'm not using the stalks, so to get 200g of basil leaves...

I think it's a shame - it's very expensive not to use the stalks,

and if you chop it terribly finely, nobody would know.

OK, so you've kept it basic.

I mean, good luck. It is simple, but baked well... Good luck.

- Thank you.
- Thanks, Holly. I like pesto.
- Yeah.

But I mean a pesto quiche, mmm...

Is it good enough? Is it going to give the flavour?

It will be if she's got a good proportion of cheese with it.

I sense a bit of worry there.

25 minutes into the challenge. With their pastries made and rolled out,

the bakers begin to line their tins.

My biggest concern is that my pastry will have a soggy bottom.

If I blind bake it long enough, it should be OK...I'm hoping.

Blind baking is the term used for baking a crust before filling.

Bakers first prick the base to prevent air pockets from forming,

and then the base is covered with foil or baking parchment,

and weights added to prevent the case sides from shrinking.

I always use kidney beans because that's what my mother used.

And they're cheaper than baking beans as well.

So you've got your beans on top?

- I've got the beans on top.
- Good.
- I hope they're enough to weigh it down, and it doesn't balloon out.

Janet is well known in her local area for her baking.

Her pastry case is flavoured with cheddar cheese

and filled with mixed vegetables.

Round our way we grow asparagus. I just thought it would be light and

fresh - hoping people feel the taste of summer.

With the pastries in the oven, the home bakers get on with making their fillings.

Beautiful.

I don't want to do ordinary,

I want to take ordinary ingredients and make them taste extraordinary.

Mary-Anne loves researching and creating new recipes.

She hopes to impress today with her roasted cauliflower,

cheese and caramelised onion quiche - with an interesting difference...

- Hey, Mary-Anne.
- Hello.

So you're doing quite a different quiche. Your pastry, for a start...

I'm doing a suet crust with caraway seeds.

That explains why you're using self-raising flour - you're doing a suet crust, not a shortcrust.

Self-raising flour, Paul...?

It's to give it a bit of air, because suet and everything is going to sit on it

and made it quite a dead dough, a dead paste - and that will just give it a little bit of a zip to it.

I've also added some fresh breadcrumbs in, to kind of lighten it up.

- See you later.
- Good luck.

So how are you feeling? Did you sleep last night?

I didn't, no. Still lots of nerves, but I'm a bit better...

Did you have quiche-related nightmares?

Quiche-related nightmares? Yeah, like Paul Hollywood coming out of my quiche and...

That's a mighty quiche if Paul can come out of it.

No - I didn't really grow up with quiche because it's not a particularly Indian dish.

- So do you think quiche is your nemesis then?
- Absolutely.

Inspired by her extensive travelling, Urvashi loves using

exotic Southeast Asian flavours in her baking.

She's seeing this as a chance to stand out from the crowd,

with an unusual crab, coriander and coconut quiche.

- I'm wondering where the coconut cream comes in.
- Really?
- It's very, very sweet,

it's full of sugar. I have never done it - I'm going to wait and see.

- Something's changed - those onions aren't on the floor.
- Everything's on the table, yeah.

Listen, what a spectacular recovery you made last week.

Thank you very much. It was a bit stressful, especially when I threw a cake on the floor.

- I am seeing the funny side of it now.
- Good.
- At the time, it wasn't very funny...

Rob has always had a strong creative streak, and dreams of one day working as a pastry chef.

He's decided to make a smoked bacon and kale quiche.

I think there's loads of time...

- You're very Zen.
- Yeah. I am very Zen today.

Just...careful of the arms.

After just 12 minutes in the oven, the danger of pastry shrinking and bubbling is eliminated.

The foil and weights are removed, and the unfilled crust returned to the oven to brown.

I'm just waiting for it to be absolutely baked blind

to the point where there's no sort of little bits left that are

slightly undercooked.

It's looking good - I just want to make sure the base is absolutely cooked through.

It's feeling nice and firm at the moment but I just want to give it a couple of minutes to crisp up a bit.

Rotating the case will ensure it is baked evenly.

This is looking dry enough to take my filling now, hopefully.

If it isn't crisp throughout, the wet filling could seep into the crust and dampen it.

- So you're the youngest baker in the tournament?
- I am.

- So you think you can give a few of these old-timers a run for their money?
- I hope so.

Jason has only been baking for seven years, and hopes to take his baking

to a more professional level by taking part in the bake off.

He's gone for an Asian-inspired salmon and pak choi quiche.

I was looking for something different and I thought of sesame seeds -

and then sesame seeds led to salmon and pak choi.

So I said, yeah, I'm sure they'll like it.

Bakers, you're halfway through your quiche challenge.

You've got one hour to go.

The final stage is to fill and bake their quiches.

It's like a swamp... That's a big swamp of quiche!

Eggs are used in the quiche's filling, as they have a unique protein composition

that starts out as liquid, and rapidly develops a structure

that supports the other ingredients when heated.

Jo, what's going on? It's all going on...

I've made a caramelised onion

with Gruyere cheese and thyme quiche.

You be very careful to not go over the edges, because it will stick and you won't get it out.

Now, have you baked that blind?

I have baked it blind, yeah.

- It is a little bit pale.
- Right, OK.

When you're baking blind, the whole idea is to cook the pastry and to lightly brown the pastry -

it's not to do any more browning because you're cooking that at a slightly lower temperature.

That is a little bit light to start with.

Watch your edges, I'm worried about those now.

- Steady hand!
- Steady hands.

Only 40 minutes left, and most of the bakers are putting their filled quiches in the oven.

- Whose quiche have you got your eye on?
- Mary-Anne's.

I've got her... If I was a betting woman, she's my winner.

Everything she bakes, I actually want to eat.

I've just gone over there and eaten half of her ingredients, so...

If you could eat some more, then...

35 minutes on the clock.

- We haven't quite got 35 minutes.
- What, you don't have time?

- We'll see how it goes.
- How much time have we got?

I don't know, about half an hour.

Now, don't fail!

But Rob is still blind baking.

- Rob, what are you doing?
- I was chilling out with the pastry too much.

What's going on in the oven? Your pastry's cooking?

- Yeah.
- Turn your oven up.
- I've turned it up a bit.

- Well, good luck, Rob.
- Cheers. I know you're pushed for time.

I often feel like a schoolteacher with Rob. I feel every now and again

he needs a slap on the wrist and say, "Now, you MUST do better."

He had two hours - everybody else has managed to do it. Just get it done!

Stop messing around and get it in the oven.

He's quite sure of himself, but he IS behind,

and I don't know whether it's going to get finished.

Whether it's a savoury Lorraine, a tangy lemon or a sweet cherry, we all love our tarts.

But one legendary British king liked them so much,

he had a separate kitchen built in order to produce them.

The magnificent 16th-century palace of Hampton Court

has been home to some of our most celebrated kings and queens, including a certain Henry VIII.

He may be famous for six wives and a penchant for beheadings,

but Henry had another passion which transformed Hampton Court

into a Tudor baking factory - his love of tarts.

Henry VIII had an impressive appetite.

We know this because we have his suits of armour.

His early ones, he has a 34-inch waist

with really broad shoulders - the guy is a real athlete.

His last suit of armour, 54-inch waist - he's really gone to seed.

With a passion for food and a court of 600 to feed,

when Henry VIII took over the palace in 1529,

he set about expanding the kitchens.

They soon covered an acre of land

and consisted of 55 rooms that were staffed by 200 cooks.

One of the kitchen's busiest departments

was built specifically to cater for the king's favourite dish.

The pastry is doing nothing but make pastry.

They're stood there rolling, mixing, kneading all day long

to produce what could be 300-400 tarts and pies a day.

When the kitchen's in full swing, you're going to need massive amounts of ingredients -

barrel loads of butter, tons of flour, huge amounts coming in here day after day.

As well as the pastry room, a confectionary kitchen was built

to whip up huge batches of fillings for hundreds of sweet tarts.

Tarts were seen as delicacies in the 16th century, and regarded as a dish of status.

They were difficult and delicate to make,

but they also presented a chance to showcase the finest ingredients.

A popular Tudor recipe was a rich strawberry tart,

which demanded the cook to squeeze the juice from the fresh fruit by hand.

Serving seeds to the king could have cost you your head.

When you're a Tudor king, it's all about the ingredients.

The best of British is going to be on the table, but it's all about food miles.

You can bring it all together in a tart.

Lovely British strawberries, but then flavoured with Persian sugar

and a hint of ginger from the Orient.

It wasn't just the opulent, luxurious tarts the king is thought to have enjoyed -

legend said his favourite was a very small, sweet, simple cheese tart

called a Maid of Honour.

King Henry is supposed to have happened upon Queen Anne,

with ladies in waiting, and they were eating tarts from a silver dish.

He tried one and it was so good that he wanted no-one else to have it,

and so the recipe was locked up in an iron box.

Another version of this story is that it wasn't the recipe

they locked away, it was the maid who knew how to make them.

20 minutes to go in the signature bake.

We're at the waiting in anticipation stage,

and fidgeting and hoping that it works stage...

My quiche is in the oven,

but I had it on the wrong setting on the oven,

so it was in there for about half an hour not cooking at all.

Mum-of-three Yasmin bakes daily for her family

and is still hoping there's time for her smoked haddock and watercress quiche to turn out as planned.

It looks nice, just not set really,

but I'm concerned because it was in the oven

for about half an hour with all that liquid just sitting on the pastry.

So I could get the soggy bottom...

We'll just have to wait.

That's ten-minute call, ten minutes to get your quiches turned out,

put on the end of your workstations and presented ready - face-up, please, Rob!

Smells really good. Mmm.

It's a little browned on one side, but hey,

you can't have everything - but it should hopefully taste very good.

Ah.

No, it's not going to come off the bottom tin.

Ah, nightmare.

I'm really pleased with the overall effect - spot on, I think.

Happy with that.

I'm quite pleased with it. It looks OK.

We'll know when we taste it.

It's like anything, it doesn't matter what it looks like, to some extent -

if it doesn't taste nice then it's a fail. So...

I don't know how set it is in the middle - that's the only thing.

- How long we got?
- Three minutes.
- Three? BLEEP.

I did make a conscious effort to make my quiche look nice -

hopefully the judges will be impressed.

Bakers, your time is up.

Yeah, it was a bit down to the wire!

- Hello, Ian!
- Hello!
- This looks...it looks tempting.

There's a lot going on in here. The texture of it is excellent.

What we haven't done is turned it upside down to see how the bottom is.

- Excellent. Not good, excellent.
- Relief.
- That's perfect.
- It's got a good base. Good colour.

For me, this is just too sweet.

It's a very unusual thing to put a sweetened coconut in with the crab.

- I've totally lost the crab.
- OK.

What you've got is a very mild Thai meal inside that.

As a quiche...do you know what, I'm in that situation where I don't know whether I like it.

Janet, it needed a little more cooking.

Nightmare, I'm sorry about that.

The pastry is absolutely delicious.

Thank you.

That's tasting really rather good. The dill comes through

in the pastry and I think it goes very well.

It doesn't look anything special

- but it certainly tastes very special.
- Thank you.

- I'm afraid I'm not mad about it.
- Doesn't work for me.

Pesto is designed to be an accompaniment -

it's too much, it's too much in a quiche.

Hello, Yasmin...

Yasmin's mistake with her oven settings

means she's unsure whether her quiche has baked properly.

It's got a great colour.

It looks very good. Not a soggy bottom.

- I'm just going to turn it over to have a...
- See the bottom.

It's all right! But it needed just a little bit longer cooking -

in the middle here, it just needs to be slightly more set.

Yeah.

- You got it in the oven in the end.
- I did, yeah.

The kale does nothing for me.

You can't taste the kale - but that pastry is superb. Very, very good.

It looks a mess.

- Really?
- Yeah.
- OK.

The actual bake. It's a bit pale.

It doesn't tempt me to eat it.

But once I get going, it's jolly good.

- Well...
- There we go.

Doesn't that look different? Lovely and brown round the outside.

- Shall we dare to have a look underneath?
- No, I think...

We like to have a look underneath, don't we?

- Oh, dear.
- That is a soggy bottom.

- Soggy bottom.
- That's one wet bottom, that one!

It looks unappetising.

- Mmm.
- The pastry's OK but it needs more colour. It's very dry.

It tastes really lovely.

- Oh, thank you.
- But it just doesn't look it.

Looks great.

There's a lot of stuff in there, I can see that.

You've done well with the custard part - not a bubble, it's just set.

The salmon flavour is spectacular.

I am getting some great flavours coming through.

Thank you very much.

Jason and Ian have really impressed the judges,

but going into round two, Joanne, Mary-Anne and last week's star baker Holly

must up their game if they're going to stand a chance of staying in the bake off.

They hated it! So that's not good!

I'm not sure what they meant when they said it was quite different.

I mean, it has cheese in, it's got eggs in, it has a pastry crust - voila quiche!

From the flamboyance and creativity of the signature bake,

the second challenge is by contrast tightly-controlled and a complete surprise.

Now comes the technical bake.

So, deep breath, what we're going to be asking you to do

is a tarte au citron, according to a Mary Berry recipe - so no pressure.

Honestly, no pressure. You can breath out now. Breathe!

Now, the technical challenge is judged blind, so we're going to be

asking Paul and Mary, please, to vacate the tent.

OK, you have 1.5 hours to complete this challenge.

On your marks, get set, bake.

Each baker has been given exactly the same list of ingredients

and a basic recipe to create the perfect tarte au citron or lemon tart.

- You made one of these before?
- I haven't, actually.

Never. I do like it but I'm a bit scared of sweet pastry,

but I'll just mess it up big time...

- There's a lot of fear coming through there.
- It's making Mary's lemon tart for Mary.

The technical challenge is unique, allowing the judges to directly compare the bakers' abilities.

The best thing about blind judging is that you judge the product in front of you, not the person.

I think sometimes when we're judging, we can think back of what's just happened,

and we think "Maybe we should give them that extra chance."

To be honest, when it comes to blind bake, nobody gets an extra chance.

With minimal instructions, they must use all their baking knowledge

to interpret the recipe correctly

and deliver a perfect result to the judging table.

Tarte au citron, then, Mary!

- Lemon tart.
- Lemon tart.

- Can I have a look?
- You can.

To me, it's a piece de resistance.

It's got to have that wafer-thin pastry, lovely and crisp underneath.

Shouldn't have a bubble in it.

That is absolutely beautiful.

The first job for the bakers is to create the sweet crust pastry.

It's kind of like a sweet version of the shortcrust

that we did before for the quiche, so I'm relatively familiar with it.

Sweet crust however contains sugar, which slows down

the formation of gluten strands,

creating a pastry that's delicate and hard to work with.

The recipe the bakers are following does not specify

how the pastry should be mixed or what the consistency should be when rolled.

I disagree strongly with the use of a lot of machines when preparing pastry.

I think it's crucial that you learn what the dough or paste should feel like.

If you can do it by hand, by rubbing the butter within your flour, add your egg,

knead it just enough so the gluten binds that paste together - that will make a fantastic pastry.

Oh, it's just so soft.

A soft, oily pastry is caused by the butter being too warm when mixed with the dry ingredients.

A bit like bill-stickers' paste, isn't it?

Can always add a bit of flour, soak it all up, and hope for the best.

Just very annoying.

Adding extra flour can make the pastry tough.

It should be chilled in a freezer for a few minutes to solidify the butter,

- making it easier to roll and line the tin.
- Trying to be optimistic.

Criticised for her pastry in the signature bake,

Jo needs to make sure it is perfect this time around.

The pressure's definitely on. I'm trying to forget what happened last time and just concentrating on this.

Back home in Essex, Joanne bakes up to ten times a week for her friends and family.

- I'm just going to have to patch this.
- But early on, she's already facing problems with her casing.

I didn't realise how temperamental pastry is.

I kept some trimmings and I've just made a little extra wall on it so hopefully that will rescue it.

I love tarte au citron.

So have you made loads before?

- I haven't made loads and I don't normally make it with quite such a soft pastry.
- Right.

- So it could be interesting.
- Right.

# A fugitive running... #

Ben was taught to cook by his grandmother, who has passed on her passion for baking.

# ..Fallen from grace... #

I was always taught a shortcrust pastry should be very, very pale,

which is what I'd got today and I was very happy with it.

So to be told that it's not coloured enough was a bit of a like, oh...

But there's no point in arguing about it, and I'll take that and move that through into this.

With pastry cases lined, it's time for the blind bake.

As with the quiches, Mary and Paul will be looking for perfectly golden and crisp pastry cases.

Because it's all in the pastry and the crunch, and it looks all right but, God, who knows?!

There's a little crack in the bottom of my case, you know.

My plan is just to make a tiny little bit more pastry to fill in that gap.

Hey, hey, hey. Yeah.

Oh, no.

- Are we facing the collapse of the pastry wall?
- Yep. We are.

I've never had it collapse on me or anything before.

I'm really fed up that I'm making silly mistakes and I don't know why.

And I really thought I was going to be all right with the pastry, but...we will see.

45 minutes to go.

With the pastries blind baking, the next task is to make the lemon filling.

The filling is flavoured with an equal amount of sugar to lemon juice.

I think wishy-washy lemon's not worth having, you know, I think

if you have something lemony, it's got to be really sharp,

so it sort of gets all your jaws going, you know.

The cases need to be filled right to the top.

Pouring the custard filling into the case while it's already in the oven helps prevent spilling.

Any leaked liquid will burn the crust during baking.

I've never made anything like this before, never made any flat, fine, fiddly tart thing.

It's not in my nature.

I'm actually enjoying this quite a lot.

The final stumbling block for our bakers

is when to take their tarts out of the oven.

I'm probably going to give it just another couple of minutes to make sure it's all right.

Take it out too soon and it won't set properly -

something Janet is all too aware of.

The quiche was not cooked totally in the middle, which was a bit of a downer.

So I think I'll need to leave it as long as I possibly can.

Leave it in too long and they risk boiling the filling,

which will result in a cracked top and air bubbles in the mixture.

I've kind of based it on a similar tart I've done before with custard.

You take it out when there's just a little bit of wobble in the middle,

so I've applied that principle, and fingers crossed it'll work.

In the lap of the gods now.

I think everyone's just hoping, more than actually knowing

that it's going to go right - including myself.

Bakers, lemon tarts wait for no man nor woman.

You have three minutes left, please.

Better or worse, out you come.

And you needn't start exploding either.

Please, please!

Moment of truth. As it stands now it looks OK.

If there's any time for trimming off the mess that's baked on the outside of the case, then I'll be happier.

I don't think it's a disaster.

It doesn't look like a disaster, because at least it's not runny.

I hope it's enough to get me through.

I like a really lemony tarte au citron so when it comes to the taste, we'll see what they think.

I'm hoping that will be rescued.

If it was at home it'd be good enough, but it might not be good enough for the judges.

So we will see.

OK, that's tart termination time. That's your lot!

The judging for the technical bake is different to the other challenges,

as Paul and Mary have not watched the bakers working.

This means they will rank them from best to worst without knowing which tart belongs to which baker.

Good gracious.

11 really lovely tartes au citron.

They're all of a jolly good standard.

Come on, let's get stuck in.

It's a bit thick on the pastry.

Tastes good, but you expect that - it's a Mary Berry recipe!

LAUGHTER This one looks a little bit darker.

There's a crack in the top of this one.

It is slightly over-baked.

A thinner pastry on this one.

I think that the blind bake wasn't long enough, and that's been boiled.

Nice to have thin pastry, though.

- This one looks like a patchwork quilt.
- Good bake.
- What's that?

That's the join in the pastry. It's folded in the corner here.

When you line the bottom of a tin, you've got to press it to the side all the way around.

This hasn't been pressed enough so you've doubled up, so it's got a thick rim all the way around it.

It's a disaster the way that's been lined. This one looks good.

Thin crust... It is not shrinking away from the side.

The filling is beautifully creamy.

- Now this next one has definitely been overdone.
- Absolutely.

It's shrinking away from the sides and has been in the oven too long.

The pastry lining on this looks quite neat.

- It's a good bake.
- Very good bake.
- The base is excellent.

And also a good ratio between the pastry and the amount of filling.

Yeah, that's nice, that one. This one looks impressive.

It's a lovely pastry.

Slightly thicker pastry on the bottom. The topping's lovely,

but the pastry underneath is not crisp.

- It needed a bit longer on the blind bake.
- Nice finish of pastry there.

- It's nice and neat, isn't it?
- Yes.

Good ratio of filling to base.

Lovely and crisp underneath that one. And we come to the last one.

Very nice short pastry.

Paul and Mary must now decide which baker showed the best technical ability with their tart.

We'll start with the lowest...

- which is...
- This person.

Simon.

Slightly overdone. Pastry's a bit of a mess.

And in tenth place, we have...

- this person.
- It's me.

That's you, Jo. It was a bit of a disaster.

Mary-Anne has had yet another bad round, finishing ninth, followed by Janet in eighth...

Oh, not again.

..Urvashi in seventh...

- Me.
- ..and Yasmin in sixth.

Rob finishes a good day in fifth, and after being in the bottom two

with her quiche, Holly's fourth place gives her some breathing room going into the final day.

- And in third place...
- Hello!

Jason, what a pretty decoration you've put on.

In second place...

is this one.

That's a nice lemon tart.

And the winner is...

Ben.

It is nigh perfect.

'I'm shocked, I'm shocked.'

I was seriously not expecting that.

I'd quite happily run and jump around and scream and shout, but I'm a bit too reserved for that,

unless I've got a spotlight on me. But I've got to nail it tomorrow

because I think people will be watching now.

'To be at the top of the pile today feels great.'

I don't let it go to my head, but I am going to bask in it

for the time that it is, and hopefully continue to do well.

'I am disappointed.'

I did expect to come bottom, especially when I put the tart down next to everyone else's.

But tomorrow's another day so, yeah, come out fighting, same as usual.

'I really don't know what went wrong today.'

I just think I made silly mistakes, really, all day.

'The boys will be really disappointed.'

Actually, that was what was going through my mind at the end of it.

I was just thinking, "Oh, God, I've let everyone down."

It's the final day in the second round of the bake off.

This is the last chance the bakers have to impress Paul and Mary,

and for one of them to avoid being sent home.

If we look over the two challenges yesterday,

who's in trouble and needs to pull out all the stops today?

- Simon. Simon's quiche - the flavours were good...
- Yes.

..but the reason why he's put in the danger zone is because he came bottom

and he burnt the whole lemon tart.

That's why he's in the position he is now.

Mary-Anne, she was the only one who did the suet crust for her quiche,

- but it wasn't done in the middle. It fell apart.
- It was a raw bottom.

She's got the knowledge there, but her work is clumsy.

Jo is another one.

Which is a surprise - she had such a great first week.

But when you're looking at the quiche...

- It was anaemic.
- It looked insipid.

It didn't hit me - "Wow, I want to tuck into that."

She's got to really pick her game up for this one.

Bakers, this is your final bake.

It's your chance to really show off and show the judges

what you can do. And I have to say, Paul and Mary are expecting nothing less than pastry miracles.

What we're looking for is a selection of miniature, sweet tarts.

The pastry's got to be super thin and well-baked

and we're looking for a batch of 24. We're looking for consistency across that number, so no pressure(!)

And of course we will be saying goodbye to one of you at the end of today, so all

that remains is for you to put in a blinding performance. Good luck!

'The final showstopper bake is the most demanding pastry challenge the bakers have faced,

'as it combines baking intricate tarts in bulk, where one small mistake will stand out.'

Make sure I use the right thing - that would be great, wouldn't it, all the wrong stuff(?)

Paul and Mary want to see two dozen intricate tarts

showcasing two flavour combinations AND decorative skills.

Each tart must be exactly the same in size, taste and appearance.

These little showstopper tarts are really quite difficult

- for the bakers because they're not used to doing large quantities.
- It's consistency.

Consistency not only in their pastry and their rolling out, but consistency in their bake.

I'm just about to roll out...

and to start lining my pastry cases.

I've put it in clingfilm for a couple of reasons - one, to stop me

touching the pastry quite as much as I need to, and to stop me adding

more flour to the mixture...

so keeping it nice and short.

And also I find it lets you get it a little bit thinner as well,

which is important for this challenge.

I just want to get the pastry right today.

I just want to make sure it's all perfect today.

Having been in the bottom two in the signature and technical bakes,

Joanne knows everything rests on how she performs today.

She's making raspberry and mascarpone tarts with

a lemon and almond pastry and honey and almond tarts with a sweet crust.

It doesn't matter how good your fillings are,

without the pastry being good, you know, that's the whole

essence of a tart, really, isn't it?

As they are making smaller, more intricate bakes,

every aspect of the process needs to be precisely executed.

Tiny little tarts, big hands - not necessarily a good combination.

So I do find them a little bit fiddly.

How long have we got? I keep losing track of time.

Time goes so terribly fast when you're trying to get on with stuff.

Janet has opted for two quite traditional tart recipes.

The first is red fruits with lemon mascarpone and the second, chocolate ganache and cherries.

It's straightforward, but done well, it tastes fantastic.

I hope they're nice flavours, and visually I wanted something that looked pretty.

The essence of miniature tarts is little ones need to be a feast for the eyes as well for the taste.

It's easier to push pastry in with another bit of pastry, and I know

Paul's got a real thing about having rounded corners,

so I'm trying to get my corners as sharp as possible.

With tins lined, it's time for the blind bake.

Hot rice bags!

You shouldn't use greaseproof paper, because it leaves marks...

on your pastry, so if you use clingfilm bags and as long as

bake at a low enough temperature, you won't get the marks.

- Is life too short to be making hot rice bags?
- I did think that as I was doing it.

I thought it doesn't matter, but it matters to Paul and it matters to Mary, so it matters to me.

Hoping to hold onto her title of star baker,

Holly's making milk chocolate and pistachio tarts and her husband's favourite, trifle tarts.

Oh, God!

The pastries go into the oven.

Timings are crucial with miniature tarts.

Their size means they bake quickly, and therefore there's much less margin for error.

In just a minute, they can turn from being underdone to burnt.

It all looks nice and calm in your kitchen today.

Yeah, it's not!

- Can you run through your two tarts?
- He's jogging!

It isn't just baking for Rob, it's like a fitness DVD at the same time.

Sorry. I am doing a, erm...

chocolate with fennel and ginger.

OK.

Then I'm doing a almond pastry with creme patissiere and poached pear.

- Are you all right for time? Er...
- No! Look at him, he's tight.

That's the only thing that's going to let me down today, and I really don't want it to.

You take it to the line every single time.

Yeah, I know, it's stressful baking.

Manage your time better, and then you'll be all right, you'll be fine.

All right.

Ben has started on his fillings.

I'm just rubbing inside of the bowl with some lemon juice.

I'm making some meringue in a minute for the lemon mousse.

Just by putting lemon juice in there,

we can get rid of any fat, and hopefully get a nice rise

into the meringues.

After coming in last place in the technical bake, Simon has to up his game in this final challenge.

- Are the family being supportive?
- Very, yeah.

What have they been telling you? What have they been saying?

"Don't fail, don't lose, and if you do lose, don't come home!"

He's hoping his 12 passion fruit and ricotta and 12 salted chocolate and

stem ginger tarts will be enough to keep him in the competition.

I'm not keen on this salt and chocolate business.

It is quite daring, actually.

If he gets that balance right, he could create something magical.

Because I did quite well yesterday, I'm not really feeling more pressure today.

I'm just taking it how it comes.

I'm happy I did well, but I'm not going to sit in it and think, "Hey, that's me done."

Hoping to build on his success, Jason is making mint chocolate tarts and blueberry Bakewell tarts.

Jason's recipe doesn't require a blind bake as the frangipane

and blueberry jam filling is baked at the same time as the pastry.

I'd love to be named the star baker today!

Part of being in this competition is to win it. I know for me, anyway.

It's half way through the showstopper challenge,

and the blind-bake tart shells are coming out.

- What's happening, then?
- Still a little bit stuck, that's all.

There it comes. Got it, got it, got it, got it. That was tense.

- Particularly with you standing there!
- The pastry seems to be all right, thank goodness,

so now I'm just making the fillings for my almond tart.

They've just caught on the edges a bit. I think I set the oven too high.

I pipe cream all the way to the edges anyway, so you won't see the edge of the case,

and I'll have to trim off where I've burnt.

Not a major drama, but...you know, keep calm, carry on.

Despite his earlier confidence following the blind bake...

Grrr!

..Rob's discovered a problem with his pastry.

They won't come out.

The pastry has too much butter in it, and so the whole thing separated,

but there's nothing I can do now,

because they're baked, so I can't make another one.

They're knackered, they're absolutely knackered.

I'd throw these straight in the bin, but I can't do anything. I'm trying to keep calm.

Now, you may have thought that the French have the monopoly on fantastic tarts,

or tartes fantastiques, as they say in France, but one of the world's most famous tarts

comes from a little town in the middle of the English countryside.

Bakewell, a tiny, remote town in the Peak District, is home to one of the world's most famous tarts.

Famous the world over, the Bakewell tart owes its international success

not to planes, trains or even automobiles,

but to the humble horse-drawn stagecoach.

In the early 1800s, they were the only way to travel great distances.

Towns like Bakewell were put on the map along with their local delicacies.

The Bakewell tart actually is known locally as a Bakewell pudding.

It was invented in the Rutland Arms by a Mrs Greaves in about the 1820s.

The hotel was a popular staging post on the 200-mile route from London to Manchester.

These stopping points gave the drivers a chance to change their horses and the passengers

an opportunity to have a good night's sleep and feast on local food.

The local legend says

that one day she asked her maid to make a strawberry tart,

and the maid made a mistake and out came the Bakewell pudding.

I don't believe that that's true.

I think Mrs Greaves invented it as a special dish for her guests.

The Rutland Arms had a major reputation for food.

It had extremely distinguished guests.

You've got people like the King of Saxony staying here, you've got Jane Austen.

It had to be up to the mark in terms of its food and hospitality.

Charles Dickens was another famous visitor, and he wrote

about eating a Bakewell pudding, describing it as a local delicacy.

I think the Bakewell pudding became so famous because of the people who

endorsed it - the aristocracy, the noblemen who stayed at the hotel, who took it to London.

They would talk about this and ask their cooks and their caterers to try and replicate this pudding.

There was fashion in those days, as there is now,

and when these famous people endorsed this pudding, then everybody wanted to try it.

Word of the pudding spread far and fast.

In 1837, a few years after its invention, a similar recipe was

published in a cookery book 4,000 miles away in America.

A global baking sensation was born, all made possible by a rickety horse-drawn coach.

OK, 30 minutes left.

Just 30 minutes left.

The bakers begin to fill and dress their tarts.

These are just slices of apple that I've poached in apple juice

and sugar, and then when you roll them up,

they magically turn into little apple rosettes which look fabulous.

Knowing that she could be in trouble if she doesn't deliver today,

Mary Anne is once again attempting something out of the ordinary.

I'm not going to be here again, so I might as well go all out, eh?

Now, I'm no experienced cook, but this looks like you've cut it pretty fine time-wise.

Yeah, and I've messed up with the creme patissiere.

Ah, you've curdled it. Do you think the pressure of it's just got to you?

I've totally cracked this time.

Last week, Urvashi was criticised by Mary for using inedible flowers as decoration.

- I was mortified, so I got out one of Mary's books from the library and it's got...
- You swot!

..a double-page spread of edible flowers. It's great,

because it's got violas and I started growing violas last year.

Urvashi wants to stun the judges this week with her strawberry and

basil tarts and elderflower tarts garnished with homemade honeycomb.

My girls love watching this, because it is just magic when it all bubbles up...

- I've never seen honeycomb being made.
- Really?

Honeycomb is made by rapidly boiling butter, sugar and golden syrup.

It's there, yeah.

When it reaches 140 degrees Celsius, bicarbonate of soda is added.

Ah!

It's like magic.

- Oh, my God!
- Isn't that brilliant?

Reacting with the hot sugar, bubbles of carbon dioxide form,

giving the honeycomb its unique structure.

- I love that.
- It's just like bubble magic.

- That's brilliant.
- Isn't it wicked? Hopefully, it will set.

Ten minutes left, everyone, ten minutes left.

I am really pushing it for time again.

Oh... Hello, sailor.

Look...at that.

What's happened with the pastry?

It's burnt. Overall, if I was going to make a bad job of pastry,

this is pretty much how I'd set out to do it.

That ganache hasn't thickened up.

Really disappointed, really disappointed. Quick miffed, really.

I can't do anything about it.

I won't be able to turn these ones out, because the pastry won't set.

so I'm just making them look a tiny, tiny bit better than they do.

I just have a mantra in my head.

"You can't get it wrong." So even if you are getting it wrong,

you've still got a chance to redeem yourself.

Now I've got two good fillings. Let's see how we get on.

Back in the game!

Bakers, leave those tarts alone.

Your time is officially up.

The remaining 11 bakers have now done all they can,

but only ten can make it through and be in with a chance

of winning the Great British Bake Off.

Jo, you're up first.

It's the moment of truth for Joanne, and the last chance

to convince the judges to keep her in the competition.

The raspberry ones look fantastic.

Cooked well.

Wasn't that nice going through that crisp pastry?

That's what we're looking for.

Nice flavours.

- Thank you.
- Then we come to the...her lemon ones.

Lovely thin pastry there.

That one melts, it flakes.

And you've got this lovely runny honey in the bottom.

The taste of that one is excellent.

You've got them all very uniform. This is what we were asking you for.

You've made them like little soldiers.

The pastry looks a little on the thick side to me.

It's over baked and too thick. Your fillings are good, your

piping work is second to none, but again the pastries have let you down.

- It could be a thing of beauty this, Jason.
- I've left you the blueberry, did you notice that?
- I did!

- It's great.
- Thank you.

I like the way you've decorated it as well.

It's simple but quite arty.

How pretty those apples look!

You've just achieved something, to me, that's quite new on the top there.

The filling is scrummy.

- They're quite deep and big.
- Yeah.

- You've bitten off more than you can chew, Paul!
- Definitely!

I love the look of them. I adore the way it looks.

- Thank you.
- It is stunning.

- How pretty do those look!
- Don't they?

Full of style and most attractive.

But really it's delicious, it's very, very nice.

That you could put in a decent establishment - to sell.

Could you, really? Oh, my goodness, thank you.

Very, very good.

APPLAUSE I might take a few back tonight.

Ah, that's really sweet, thank you.

I said to you, you really should be able to eat

all the decoration, and haven't you done well!

Of course, violets, violas are totally edible,

and they look so pretty, particularly against the yellow.

What was in this pastry again?

- Just a straightforward pastry.
- Which you burnt.

- It's very overcooked, Simon.
- It is very overcooked, yes.

I'm getting chocolate.

Mm.

- And it is quite...it's salted well.
- Thank you.

- But that case is...
- Oh, it's horrific.

- It's a non-starter.
- That's rather a shame, really.

Robert, Robert...

Oh, dear, you're capable of such great things, you know.

Tastes really good. What else can I say?

- The problem is, it's a mess.
- Yeah.

This isn't the first time that you've been in this situation.

- I'm disappointed, to be honest.
- These are not good enough.

It's getting to know that they had kind of like big hopes for me and then basically not delivered.

I think I've done enough to be able to stay, but I also think that I've messed up enough to go.

Basically, I'm fearing the worst.

I think the person who's most obviously at risk of going home would be Rob.

We'll see how that one goes.

I'm obviously hoping, really, really praying that I stay, but

I had a really bad day yesterday, so I am quite concerned still.

Mary and Paul look back over the weekend's offerings individually

before deciding who they think should leave the Great British Bake Off.

But first, who will be named star baker?

Jason's had a really good time, hasn't he?

That blueberry with the frangipane, great.

Ian's also had a very good weekend, possibly the best quiche in the room.

I was mad about the casing of it, so crisp it looked beautiful.

And he had an amazing tarte au citron, let's not forget.

Again, the flavours were good, pastry was very good.

So is he in the running to be star baker?

For me, it's very, very close.

Let's look at the other end of the spectrum.

You identified that you thought Joanne and Simon were in trouble.

Joanne had a bad day yesterday.

Tenth in the tarte citron, second from bottom.

- The worst quiche.
- It's not good for her.

Today, though, her tart was pretty good.

We were looking for something that was beautifully presented, and she made excellent pastry.

- Now, Simon.
- The main reason why Simon is in the bottom is because he

- came last in the lemon tart.
- What did you make of his tarts, Mary?

Simon's pastry is really overcooked.

The flavour's all right. The pastry's knackered, it's burnt.

- You liked the chocolate salt, though?
- The actual filling of the chocolate was lovely,

but when you look at it, it isn't of a standard that we're looking for.

I'll tell you another person that needs a mention - Rob.

That is disgusting. How dare that be put up!

If he can't do it, then he shouldn't be in the competition.

He's got the skills, he's got the technique.

- Yeah.
- He's just not organised.

It grates me that he bothered turning up to create that.

- You're forgetting that yesterday he had two very good results.
- It doesn't make any difference.

This is a fundamental disagreement that you need to resolve.

- It's a Paul and Mary moment.
- Yeah, sure.
- Yeah.

Bakers, let's start with the positive.

The person that the judges felt this weekend really excelled in

every single challenge and therefore must be this week's star baker is...

..Jason.

APPLAUSE Well done, mate.

- Thank you.
- Well done!

Now we come to the slightly more painful issue of who won't be joining us next week.

The saddest thing of all, of course, is that we have to lose one person.

And I have to say this was extremely close.

And the person who will be leaving us this week is...

..Simon.

I'm so sorry, mate.

It's all right.

No, it's all right.

I don't feel any resentment for the result.

It's got to be the best people go through for this competition.

It is tough. I've told Rob that I expect him

to win, otherwise I'm coming to talk to him afterwards.

- I'm well sorry.
- Yes, mate. Come here.

For me, Simon just didn't perform all weekend.

It was disappointing today, because his pastry was so overbaked.

Give us a squeeze.

I am upset that I didn't reach the standard that I set myself,

but it will push me to do more in my own baking at home and set a higher standard.

You're lucky.

For me, Rob, I still feel he shouldn't be here.

But after much talking and chatting, we decided to let him stay.

I want to prove to Mary and Paul that I can be consistently good.

I don't think you've seen the best of me yet at all.

I am enjoying the moment.

This has proven that a lot of the effort that I put in is really paying off, so I am happy.

Obviously I'd had a bad couple of days, so it's such a big relief.

Oh, sorry.

Oh, I'm so relieved.

Next time...

I've got butterflies in my tummy, I'm nervous now.

..it's bread!

It's a bit scary. You just want it to work and you want it to be right.

Paul is on the search for perfection...

This is the week they really have to raise their game.

..setting his first technical challenge - focaccia.

Someone's not been following my recipe.

I think this has been the scariest challenge so far.

The bakers must rise to his exacting standards.

The whole thing's collapsed. It's just gone completely.

Everyone is out to impress.

- You've nailed it.
- It's a lovely texture, that.

But there can only be one winner.

This is more than a competition.

- 'Ten people remain in The Great British Bake Off.'
- If I couldn't bake, I don't know what I'd do.

- I'm doing it as well as I can.
- Just doing it this far is great.

- 'Last time...'
- Please!
- '..they pushed themselves to the limit.'

- You can win it one week and be knocked out the next.
- 'With pastry.'

- It looks a mess.
- Really?
- Yeah.
- OK.
- '19-year-old Jason was crowned Star Baker.'

- The salmon flavour is spectacular.
- 'But for the first time in the Bake Off, Jo struggled.'

- Sorry.
- 'And yet again...'
- They're knackered, absolutely knackered.

- '..Rob came close to leaving the competition.'
- You're lucky.
- You haven't seen the best of me.

- 'This week, it's bread.'
- I'm looking forward to a decent loaf.
- I'm looking forward to giving you one.

- 'Paul's lifelong obsession.'
- Someone hasn't followed my recipe.
- 'And some bakers' nightmare.'

Ian! Ian, Ian!



- 'Who will rise to the occasion?'
- I look mental just staring at the oven.

- 'And prove they have what it takes?'
- Does that sound hollow?
- I really don't know.

'To win The Great British Bake Off.'

You know what? This is one thing I might have up on you.

This week, our bakers will be tackling bread.

So dust down your baps. This is Paul's watch.

'The ten remaining bakers are about to face three increasingly complex challenges over the next two days,

'after which, whoever falls short will have to leave the Bake Off.'

Good morning and welcome back, bakers. Now be afraid, be very afraid

because you're on Paul's patch as this week, it's bread week.

Bakers, your signature challenge today is to create a flavoured loaf which is free-form.

That means not baked in a tin.

- You've got three-and-a-quarter hours.
- Tighten up the apron strings, wash your hands. On your marks...

- Get set...
- BOTH: Bake!



This first challenge requires that the bakers create a loaf

which looks good, tastes better and features innovative and complementary flavours.

They have complete freedom with ingredients,

but as this must be a free-form loaf, the only thing they can't use is a tin.

Some of them have not the skill and they've been practising like mad all last week.

Let's hope they achieve good results.

Everybody who makes bread at home knows how tricky it can be.

You've got to make the dough, rise the dough and bake the dough.

Those three things they must do, each one they could fall down on.

The winner last year was the guy that made the best bread on the day,

so the consistency we're looking for is much higher than other weeks

because technically, this is harder to do.

I am feeling pretty relaxed. I've made this bread many times.

And it tastes fabulous.

Mary-Anne has three university degrees, but now devotes most of her time to studying baking.

Everything she's learnt has gone into her ambitious and totally original recipe

for a ploughman's loaf, featuring cheese, fresh onion and a bottle of beer.

Imagine a ploughman out in the field taking his packed lunch.

- This bread, an apple and a drink and you'd be set.
- You certainly would!

How are you getting the cheese in there?

I'm doing big chunks of a nice, really strong Welsh cheddar,

so it doesn't disappear into the loaf when it cooks.

- You do get a nugget of cheese.
- So again a nice, robust, rustic dish from you.

Successful, basic bread dough is a carefully measured combination of yeast, flour, water and salt.

The bakers are free to add any other ingredients they wish at any stage.

And as usual, Holly is already aiming high.

The flavours are Parma ham and caramelised onions in one side

and then just chocolate and hazelnut in the other.

- In the same dough?
- Yes.

Sweet and savoury at either end?

It's easy to take on a picnic. You've got enough to do with all the paraphernalia with babies.

'Holly's obsession with home baking has forced her husband to build new shelves

'for all her recipe books and often she reads them in bed.

'Her signature sweet and savoury loaf is based on a complex brioche dough,

'made by adding eggs and milk to a basic bread dough.'

- The proof will be whether you take a mouthful and you get chocolate and onion.
- That would be a nightmare.

- I prefer two separate things.
- Yeah, me too.
- But in this category, she couldn't do two loaves.

You asked for one loaf. If it doesn't work, you'll say, "I told you so."

- The silverback will attack.
- Yes. Let's wait and see.

Kneading is one of the most critical elements of bread-making.

It stretches molecules of gluten in the dough.

If these are not forced to become elastic,

the dough will not rise and the loaf's structure will be tough and inedible.

A lot of it is having the strength to knead it.

But I use a mixer. It's a lot easier. There's no point in kneading it unless you want muscles.

Urvashi has developed her own short cut.

I've tried different ways of kneading and this one works for me,

so stick to it.

Mum of two and full-time marketing executive,

Urvashi dreams of one day baking for her own delicatessen.

She aims to impress with her signature peppercorn loaf.

It gets to this stage and you panic because you think, "It's sticking to the table!"

- Is there anyone you're thinking about when you're doing that?
- I can name a few people, yeah.

- Do you pretend that the dough is Paul's face?
- No.

And you're just working your fists into his face?

I think, for me, if you use it as something that's horrible,

- you don't get quite so good a food.
- Oh, really?

Climbing fanatic Ben also has a passion for musicals

and has performed in shows across London's West End.

He's hoping to dazzle the judges with his walnut, raisin and rosemary loaf.

It's a very nerve-wracking week. It's Paul's thing.

What I want to do is get something that he would find acceptable, I think is the goal of today.

Hang on, hang on, hang on. Three o'clock, mate.

Look as if you know what you're doing. You do know what you're doing. Hi, Paul!

'With kneading complete, the dough must be proved.

'If left covered in a warm place,

'the yeast feeds on the flour, releasing bubbles of carbon dioxide, causing the dough to rise.

'Unless the bakers factor in enough time for their dough to prove to twice its original size,

'their loaf's crumb structure will be unacceptably tight.'

Bread takes long, but it's not a long time of doing stuff. It's just waiting for it to rise.

'For one of the bakers, this pause in the first challenge is welcome.'

Ian! Ian, Ian!

- This is the beginning of the Bake Off weekend.
- I know.

When his partner Stephan fell ill ten years ago,

Ian quit his job to care for him and while at home, developed his talent and passion for baking.

His signature bake is one of Stephan's favourites -

a courgette loaf flavoured with Caerphilly cheese and thyme.

- What's happened?
- I cut my finger when I was chopping my thyme very delicately.
- Yeah.

I cut the top of my finger. But I think I'm going to be OK.

Will you have to do the whole challenge one-handed?

No, I'm hoping the bleeding will be stemmed enough.

- Do you like your elbow support?
- It's lovely. I think I might ask for that permanently.

'The business of bread-making has always been one of Britain's most dangerous professions

'and working in a mill could seriously damage your health.'

Tom, I've heard that working in a mill is quite dangerous.

- Should I be wearing a protective suit?
- Not today, no.

But you could get mixed up in the machinery.

There is no emergency "stop" button here.

Medieval millers did occasionally lose legs or arms or even heads.

'And if you weren't mangled by the machinery, you could be crushed by the millstone itself.'

Some types of millstone were made not just of one piece of stone, but several smaller pieces of stone,

all held together by a steel band. If that band breaks,

then pieces of millstone would fly out in all directions.

- Seriously?
- We're talking about millstone missiles.
- Have you got your steel band in place?
- Yes. Trust me.

'Flying millstones and the risk of decapitation is just the beginning.'

This flour is the main danger facing us in this mill.

- Why is it dangerous?
- In the right concentration in the air, flour dust can explode.

There would be no warning and the mill would be destroyed.

'And we're not just talking medieval mills.

'In 1965, a massive explosion tore through a mill in London's East End, costing the lives of four people.

'It turns out that flour is a lethal and explosive carbohydrate.'

Mike, why is flour so combustible?

Because it's a carbohydrate

and contains carbon and hydrogen and oxygen

and that enables it to burn.

Take me through how a mill actually explodes. What happens?

There's a lot of flour, very fine particles suspended in the atmosphere.

And if there's an ignition source like the millstones getting hot

or machinery getting hot, you have an explosive mixture.

'To test flour's flammability, Mike has created a replica mill,

'complete with a dusting of flour and a candle to supply the ignition.'

- Mike, much as I trust you, health and safety at all times...
- OK.

- I'm going to use these bellows to force some air...
- OK.

- ..into the tubing and up through the funnel.
- Yeah.

Whoa!

Mike, that's, um... That's pretty impressive, Mike.

It seems to have melted your mill. That's amazing.

- So quick as well.
- So quick, yes.
- Scary.

I felt that from back there. Seriously.

'Don't try this at home.

'The next time you bite into a sliced loaf, think of our early bread-makers.

'To produce our daily bread, they were dicing with danger.'

90 minutes to go in the signature bake.

I think it is rising, but I don't want to push my luck.

With their dough proving, most bakers have moved on to preparing any fillings

for their signature bake.

There's a lot of work, then there's a lull as you're waiting for it to prove.

That's what puts people off making bread. It's time-consuming, then often it comes out as a brick.

Yasmin works with her husband as a childminder, but has had jobs

from receptionist to poetry magazine editor and paramedic.

She hopes the diverse flavours in her North African-inspired loaf will impress.

- It's a white loaf, but I'm adding an Egyptian spice mix called dukkah to it.
- Delicious.

Is it salt, sesame seeds, coriander?

It's cumin, coriander, thyme, sesame seeds, almonds.

I just put it on meat and pizzas.

You've roasted this because it's warm. And that makes the aroma. It's lovely. Hmm!

Once risen, bread dough must be knocked back,

a technique which disperses any large bubbles of carbon dioxide.

This is my favourite bit when it comes out and you see all the little bubbles popping everywhere.

Dough which hasn't been knocked back will produce bread of an uneven texture with tunnelling

and large air holes.

I'm adding green peppercorn. I don't want it to blow your mouth away.

I want it to be a subtle flavour.

Introducing any ingredients to a bread dough risks altering its delicate chemical balance.

- I hope it impresses them.
- Incorrect proportions of an acidic ingredient like onion can retard the yeast,

stopping any rise in its tracks.

I'm intrigued because I've seen these neat little piles of cheese and neat little piles of fried onion.

They're for my tear-and-share cheese and onion loaf.

I'm making little balls. It's got a cheese and onion package inside.

Hopefully, when they rise, they will stick together like a honeycomb shape.

When he isn't studying, 19-year-old Jason is a passionate member of his university's baking society.

His cheese and onion tear-and-share loaf will also feature a cheddar cheese crust.

The dough pieces are too spread apart on the tray.

I don't think they'll join together sufficiently. If you lift up one half, it'll collapse.

I think those balls will struggle to rise.

There's something so satisfying about bread. How old were you when you started baking bread?

I started when we lived in West Africa and I had to cook the bread

because the bread was awful, it was just like cotton wool.

Globe-trotting grandma and retired teacher Janet has worked in Nigeria, Saudi Arabia and India,

but her signature loaf is Swiss - a Zupfe loaf flavoured with Gruyere cheese.

- I was going to weigh it, but I'm so rubbish at dividing in numbers.
- Into three?
- Into six.

A six-strand plait? I want to see this.

My friend in Switzerland makes this every Sunday.

When we used to go and stay, she used to turn out about four of these for breakfast.

- How are you going to do six?
- Over two, under one, over two, then over two, under one, over two.

I'm absolutely enraptured. I could watch this for hours.

Aw!

That's really impressive. I like that plait.

Jo has opted for a loaf that seems more straightforward.

I'm just shaping it out into a rectangle,

so that I can put my fillings in it. You pull it out, rather than roll it.

I don't want to lose any air from it.

Jo has spent 20 years raising her three sons.

They persuaded their mum to enter the Bake Off, so she could do something for her,

but her mozzarella, ham and pepper Stromboli loaf is still all about her boys.

- Have you been working on this all week?
- I make this a lot cos Dylan loves it.

- He has it for packed lunch for school, so sometimes I'll make one the night before.
- Oh, lucky boy!

I used to have Wagon Wheels and a penny wafer if I was lucky.

'To reduce the risk of a filling inhibiting the bread's rise, the dough is proved for a second time.'

- It's a waiting game.
- It is, yeah.

- OK then...
- One hour to go.
- Oh, gosh!

Without a tin to contain it, the re-risen dough must now be shaped before baking.

Oh, that's got a great wobble. It's like a deployed airbag.

I'm looking forward to a decent loaf.

I'm looking forward to giving you one.

Dedicated foodie Rob lives in London and loves trying out new recipes on his friends.

He's created a rye and coriander seed loaf in the bid to redeem his reputation.

- How are you going to finish that?
- With a bit of flour, then I'll slash it.
- What blade?

I'm going to use a bread knife. I've tried using scalpels before, but haven't found anything sharp enough.

Scoring the loaf shapes it by controlling the direction in which it expands in the oven.

- I'm not a confident slasher.
- Unless the cut is smooth, the bakers risk tearing their dough

- which could cause the loaf to collapse.
- It's a bit scary. You just want it to be right.

But you can never, never tell.

Adding water to the oven creates steam, keeping the crust soft at the beginning of the bake

- and allowing the loaf to rise more freely.
- Fingers crossed.

The steam will also dissolve the sugars on the dough crust.

- As the water evaporates, the sugars caramelise, leaving a glossy crust.
- That's it. It's done.

I've done everything I can possibly do.

I'm just going to have to hope now.

Leaving bread to bake too long risks a burnt crust and dry texture.

Too short and all you're left with is a wet, doughy disaster.

I look slightly mental just staring at the oven,

but it's seconds with this thing. It could just go.

It won't win any beauty contests, but it's smelling really nice.

We've got an amazing selection. We've got herbs, spices, cheese, onions.

Different shapes, original methods. We couldn't have had a greater variety.

Yeah.

It should be done. I just don't want it to be under.

There's only one test for a well-baked loaf -

tapping its bottom.

Does that sound hollow to you? I don't know.

- What is it?
- It's like a rye.

It's quite tense. It's not like a cake where you can put a skewer in and know when it's cooked.

You've got to go on sound and I'm never entirely sure what a hollow sound sounds like.

It did not sound hollow, so I'll pop it back in.

TAPPING SOUNDS

OK, I hate to be a "pan" in the backside, but time is up, so stop baking now.

Done.

It's like the worst week in a way. Paul's such an expert in this area. It is pretty nerve-wracking.

It's judgment time.

- Hi, Jason.
- Hello.
- Look at this!

It's baked well. It's nice and soft.

I was a bit concerned that they weren't going to touch sufficient enough to be classed as a loaf.

It's a lovely texture, that, isn't it?

Hmm. It's got a lovely flavour as well.

- I think you've done quite well, Jason.
- Quite well. Notice he can't say "really well".

That looks a fine-shaped loaf. Very bold, isn't it?

It is, yeah.

- It smells lovely.
- Have a smell.

- The coriander comes out very strongly.
- Lovely.

The flavours are excellent. I like that. I like that idea.

What's left with me is strong, strong rosemary.

- Overwhelmed totally by the rosemary.
- Really? I like the rosemary flavour in it.

- Then don't put the raisins and walnut in there.
- OK.

The shape and the seasoning are very good.

You've got nice flavours, but unfortunately, you've left the bottom unbaked.

You have a run of unbaked dough.

- You've got a lovely look on that bloomer.
- Thanks.

I like the crust on that. I'd like more salt in it. Would you?

- Yeah.
- I normally put five grams of salt in a 500 gram of flour loaf.

Personally, I would use 10 grams for 500.

- Right.
- The texture's great, looks great. It's lacking with flavour.

It doesn't look very neat.

- No.
- But it works in so many ways because you haven't been afraid to put colour on it.

With bread sometimes it's a good thing not to be neat. It's nice to be informal.

- All the flavours are coming through.
- Smashing crust.
- Really good.

- Thanks, Mary-Anne.
- Thank you.

It falls apart when it cuts.

- All this separation doesn't look very good.
- It's very tricky, doing this.

- You've got some great flavours going on in there, but it's slightly underbaked.
- OK.

The bake's excellent.

- The coriander is not coming through.
- The coriander seeds aren't coming through.

- It's more the smell I think you get from the coriander.
- Yeah, but I'll expect to taste it as well.

The overall technical ability of making that loaf is very good.

- I hope you carry on in that vein.
- Cheers.

Gosh, this is a whopper, isn't it?

That heavy weight is to do with that.

It's not proved and baked enough. You can see how wet it is. A courgette will always do that.

It will introduce moisture. It will never take it away.

- How much courgette? - About 250...

- That's what's making it...
- It'll never bake.

It looks a great loaf. It's got a nice structure.

You've got the onion marmalade really well cooked. There are still the pieces there. It's a lovely texture.

You've got some nice flavours in there. You've done well.

Phew!

Holly, Jason, Mary-Anne and Yasmin have already staked their claim to become this week's Star Baker.

But Ian, Jo, Janet and Urvashi must improve over the next two challenges.

It's a bit ironic that I started out to create a loaf that wasn't bland and it ended up being quite bland,

so I'm a bit disappointed.

I've made it loads of times before.

I like it, my friends and family like it, so it won't put me off making it, but I was disappointed.

Paul was impressed. I thought it was going to work, so I am happy!

Be it a white, sliced loaf or a crusty cob,

British bread has classically been reliant on wheat.

Not so over the Irish Sea where their first bread was based on an entirely different crop.

"May the enemies of Ireland never eat bread, nor drink whiskey,

"but be tormented with itching without benefit of scratching."

That St Patrick's Day toast shows the Irish love of a good loaf,

but in the 19th century, it took a different form.

The wet Irish climate wasn't great for growing wheat,

so the working classes made their bread with the only crop they had.

The potato grew very well in Irish soils

and even on a small plot of land, you got excellent returns.

One acre would support a family for one year.

It's not surprising that Irish people started making potato breads.

The easiest one to make, and it tastes really good, is potato bread made from mashed potatoes,

a bit of flour, salt and so on,

mixed together and baked over the fire on a griddle.

For the underclasses, the potato was the only ingredient in a very monotonous diet.

The estimates are that an average person was consuming 14 pounds of potatoes per day.

In 1845, disaster struck. Over a warm, rainy summer, potato blight swept the country.

Not only did absentee English landlords prohibit farmers from varying their crop,

the British government failed to realise how serious the famine was and swathes of crops were destroyed.

In Ireland, close to three million people were without their main source of food.

Up to about a million people died of disease and malnutrition

and another million emigrated.

Together, that exodus represented about a quarter of the population.

Times remained desperate until the early 1850s

when hard wheat and bicarbonate of soda were shipped in from across the Atlantic,

giving birth to Irish soda bread.

Soda bread was cheap, easy and quick to make, instantly becoming an Irish favourite.

Even today, traditional bakeries produce up to 10,000 loaves a week, either griddled or baked.

I think we're the only region within the British Isles

that has an ethnic range of breads that people buy on a daily basis.

I would have said that ten years ago soda farls would have declined. In fact, the opposite has happened.

It's so important, I feel, to keep that tradition

and try and get another generation of people wanting to eat it, and we should be proud of it.

Unique, tasty, popular - the bread of Ireland has quite rightly become a national icon.

'The bakers' next challenge involves a bread from another part of Europe.

'It's become wildly popular in this country despite how difficult it is to bake correctly.'

Bakers, now it's time for the technical challenge.

As ever, this is judged blind,

so we're going to ask Paul and Mary to leave while the baking commences.

And breathe easy! I can now reveal to you bakers that your technical recipe for this challenge

is...focaccia,

and to add a little bit of pressure into the mix,

you will be working with Paul Hollywood's own recipe.

We're looking for the perfect focaccia and you've got three and a half hours in which to bake it.

- So on your marks...
- Get set...
- Bake!

Focaccia is an Italian flat bread which originated in Ancient Rome

where it was originally baked in the ashes of the fireplace.

All the bakers have access to identical, but unmeasured ingredients.

But certain details from Paul's recipe are missing.

And they will need all of their baking instinct to fill the gaps.

The crumb structure in a focaccia should look just like that.

It's a quite open structure with big holes, small holes, big holes, small holes.

English bread has very tight, small air holes.

This recipe has lots of water in it, causing this irregular crumb.

To start off with, you put three-quarters of the water into the dough,

then mix that up in the bowl, then you can introduce the rest of the water, a little at a time.

If they add all the water at the same time, it'll turn into a mush.

- That's strange.
- It is weird, isn't it?
- Oh, gosh.

I've got no idea if this is right.

- Will this make bread?
- Are you sure you should be adding more, Jason?

I've got to try and salvage what I can.

HE LAUGHS

I'll just go with it and see what happens.

Adding flour is risky. It can transform the wet, batter-like dough of a good focaccia

into a conventional bread mix.

Every drop of water should be used.

- I've kind of done that.
- So you are way... Have you got any more water to add?

I've got a bit there, but the dough was wetter than I would have liked.

"Tuck the sides of the dough into the centre. Turn the bowl 90 degrees."

You've got to have faith in the recipe.

The wet dough must be stretched to activate the gluten.

Only oil should be used to stop it from sticking.

- Can I just grab a bit of flour?
- Yeah. Sorry.

The more the dough is worked, the larger the air holes in the bread.

Obviously, Paul knows what he's doing, but at the minute... I really don't know.

Next, the dough must be proved for the yeast to release bubbles of carbon dioxide.

It's during this stage that the amount of water used

will determine just how irregular those bubbles are.

It's massive. Look!

I don't know if it's supposed to look like that.

CLATTER Oh!

Oops!

It's flattened a bit.

It's entirely up to the bakers when to stop proving.

I think that's probably fine.

Next, the dough must be flattened...

and dimpled.

I'm concerned because it says, "Flatten the dough on the tray and add dimples." But it's so wet still.

90 minutes to go.

Timing is now crucial.

During the second proving, the bakers need the dough to double in size again.

But they still need enough remaining time to bake the focaccia correctly.

- It's all right. - Let me see yours.

If it hasn't risen, I've just wasted an hour.

I don't think it's number one, but you never know.

Ladies and gentlemen, you've got 30 minutes to go before your breads must be finished.

The last two ingredients are olive oil...

I'm trying to drizzle, rather than have a flood.

- ..and salt.
- I feel like a chef doing that.

These provide colour and a crisp texture as the focaccia bakes in the oven.

- Fingers crossed.
- No exact oven time has been specified. The bakers are on their own.

I think it's going to be really good because you can see the dimples. Mine's just completely flat.

Oh, this looks good, you know.

OK, that's one minute, please.

- You've got to be proud of that. - I am quite proud of that.

Oh, yes, Janet, yes!

Yeah, right(!)

Bakers, please bring your focaccia up towards the gingham altar to be judged.

The technical bake is judged blind.

Paul and Mary will have no idea whose focaccia is whose.

They're more similar than I thought they would be.

By slicing each focaccia, Paul and Mary will be able to discover

who has achieved the all-important, irregular crumb structure.

- We'll try this one, Mary.
- Mm-hm.

Someone's not been following my recipe. There's too much flour in there.

Those are all even, little tiny holes in that,

not the different sized aeration.

Someone's thought, "Paul's made a mistake here. I don't think I'll add all the water."

The flavour of that one is all right, but there's not enough water in there.

Or they added too much flour and kneaded it.

This has got a crisper top and the aeration is uneven.

- Again too much flour.
- Would you say that that is when they've been kneading it?

- They've added more flour as they thought it was too wet.
- Yeah.

It's the same with that one. It's a dry crumb. It's not wet enough.

This one's quite interesting, actually.

This one looks a bit better.

- You see the strata on that one?
- Yes, it's springy.

- And it tastes good.
- This is a wet dough.

Dimples would be good inside it as well, but don't just go... Put them in right the way down.

That's not bad though.

It's got a nice crust.

Mm-hm.

That's bread-like again.

- This one's a bit bready again.
- It has a nice crust, though.

Hmm.

Paul and Mary must now rank the focaccias from worst to best.

- I'm in total agreement.
- The person in last place is...

this one. That's yours.

- Do you understand why?
- Yeah, not enough water, too much flour.

Number nine, this one here.

When you look at that strata, it's not irregular enough. It's quite dry. It shouldn't be like that.

- For the third technical bake in a row, Janet finishes in the same position.
- Always number eight!

Followed by Jason in seventh place, Holly in sixth, Mary-Anne in fifth

and Rob just beaten by Ben in the battle for third.

- Number two.
- Very good.

- And number one is this.
- APPLAUSE

- She's back!
- That strata, these massive air holes you hit every now and again are great.

That's really nice. That's one of the best ones by far and away I've seen for quite a while. Well done.

APPLAUSE

Obviously, that's how Paul wanted it to come out

and that was the recipe, so thank you to the bread god. Is that Paul?

I can't tell you what made me deviate from the recipe.

I've got to put it behind me and crack on and do the best I can in the next challenge.

If I spoke to my husband, he would say, "You're there, you're good at this, you know you're good at this.

"You just need to forget about what he said and just focus on what you need to do."

'There's just one final bread challenge left for the bakers to impress the judges.'

- Who's in the running for Star Baker?
- I suppose it's Jo.

- I think Holly and Yasmin.
- Who's in the danger zone?

- Ian and also Urvashi.
- I think Janet's got to be in there as well.

The challenge that they've got coming is extremely difficult and this really will sort them out.

We'll ask you to do something a little bit different for the showstopper. It's a two-part bake.

We'll ask you for this first part to make a display bread basket.

For the second part, we need you to fill that display bread basket with 24 rolls.

Sweet or savoury and up to two varieties.

You've got five hours on the clock.

- On your marks...
- Get set...
- Bake!

'This final challenge is the ultimate test of planning, timing and precision.

'Individual rolls require even greater accuracy when it comes to proving,

'flavouring and baking.'

If I know I've done the best I possibly can, I'll be fine.

Urvashi's hopes of staying in the Bake Off rest on her chilli and halloumi rolls

and her lemon and coriander mini loaves.

- What other rolls are you doing?
- Lemon and coriander baguettinis, so little baguettes.

- Baguettinis!
- I like that word - "baguettini".

- Is that your word?
- Yeah.
- Very good.

- They should be quite different. - I hope so.

I'm back in the zone. Once you start bread making, it's quite relaxing.

Survival for Ian depends on his walnut and raisin rolls and cracked wheat logs.

- Nervous about not being wet enough. - Doesn't feel wet.

- Can you add it now?
- You can, but it's a nightmare.

What you're best off doing when you make doughs with additional flavour is to develop the dough first,

then after it's been resting for at least an hour, add your ingredient.

For the third Showstopper challenge in a row, Mary-Anne is experimenting.

I was reading a document I'd got saved on my computer by Eliza Acton.

She used to bake in earthenware pots.

I thought that sounds quite a nice idea.

I presume the clay gets hot and gives a nice crust.

Her herb and walnut flowerpot breads are just the start.

For dessert, there's chocolate and fresh chilli rolls.

It's chocolate dough with chocolate chips.

The overall flavour is chocolate, but there's a little afterglow of chilli.

- I think it works really well. Some of those will disappear. You'll find them in here.
- OK! Bye.

I think I am in control today.

I've written everything down, I've been doing the timing's again. I'm organised and hopefully OK.

It is yet again another ambitious Showstopper for Rob

with blueberry brioche buns and rolls featuring poppy seeds and fresh lemon.

Have you put any lemon juice in or just the rind?

It hasn't got salt! Em, I've put...

- seven lemon rinds and one-and-a-half juice.
- Wow.
- No salt in this dough?

I always add it in in the end. Do the dough and then knead it for, say, eight minutes

- and then the last two minutes, put the salt in.
- Be really careful.

You'll never get salt distributed enough in the dough by hand then.

That's been salted now? Still bland.

Rip a bit of dough out.

- Yeah.
- Don't eat it!

- I just did.
- Don't eat it! Can you taste salt?

- No.
- Can you taste salt?
- I swallowed it too quickly.

- You're not meant to swallow it.
- I know.
- The best way is to dilute the salt in water

and then put it in your dough. More liquid makes it softer, which is good, and it distributes better.

Consistency of size and shape is preoccupying some bakers more than others.

I am just doing my stilton and walnut rolls.

And I'm weighing individually the cheese that goes in, which is just a bit nuts, actually.

But it's got to be done to make sure you get the right amount in each one.

I'm guessing the amount of onion and sage to put in. It's a bit here or there.

I want every single roll to be, um, kind of the exact same shape.

And so I'm weighing out the dough.

I hate all this weighing. 12. Four 12s is 48. Five 12s is 40...

Uh!

Three hours to go in the final challenge.

One of the best things about bread is you can apply so many different creative ideas to one basic dough.

Through the centuries, every UK region had its own bread recipe, especially the Scots,

who even formulated one to sustain their fishermen at sea.

Scotland's fishing industry played a pivotal role in the economy, but an army marches on its stomach

and the creation of a unique bread roll in the 19th century helped to ensure its continuing success.

Fishermen needed high-energy,

long-lasting food for the days at sea. They called it ship's biscuit.

They were very hard and dry because they were basically flower and water and made to last for many weeks.

They used to refer to it as hardtack because these were hard as rocks and utterly tasteless.

No Scotsman will put up with that.

In the 1880s, the fishing industry of Aberdeenshire expanded rapidly

as the numbers of herring boomed. At its peak, 40,000 people worked in Scotland's fishing industry

and around 7,000 boats filled with hungry fishermen were setting sail.

According to Aberdonian legend, a local fisherman approached a baker

and asked him to create something less hard and dry.

What the baker did was take a lump of bread dough, he added some fat, and then he kneaded it.

The result was a high-fat, salty, croissant-like bread roll that would last much longer

than a conventional roll. The Aberdeen buttery was born.

The high fat content, crucial to the success of the buttery, was directly linked to one of Aberdeen's

- most famous exports.
- In the 1880s in Aberdeen,

there were lots of butchers. In their shops was dripping - ideal cheap fat that was readily available

for the buttery. The high fat meant it kept better and tasted better, whether one day old or three weeks.

The buttery was an instant hit. Its popularity soon extended beyond the fishing fleet,

gaining official recognition when it entered the Scottish dictionary in 1899.

And it continues to be a firm favourite amongst the fishermen during their time at sea.

It's got a lot of energy. You're always hungry, constantly.

All the fishing boats still eat them.

It's passed on, generation to generation. Folk like them.

With the average baker selling over 600 butteries a day,

the unique high-fat bread roll remains as popular as it was over 100 years ago.

They look really pretty.

With two hours to go, the rolls are ready to come out of the oven,

- but not all have gone according to plan.
- They're meant to have risen more. I think the yeast died.

- They should be double the size.
- A number of factors can affect this,

but the key addition to be wary of is salt.

When mixing it with yeast and flour, it's crucial that the salt and yeast do not mix as salt kills yeast.

The bakers must now turn their attention to their display baskets.

These can be made with a non-edible salt dough or an edible bread dough.

- I've made this three times at home. I'm just hoping it's neat enough and it works today.
- What are you doing?

Basically, there's a criss-cross, then circles and these will go in and out of them.

- Latticed within that?
- Yeah.

Hold your hands out.

Oh, no, no, no! We need to do some work on this.

I need some mantra, to workshop. Would an expressive dance help?

- I need to just find a way of calming...
- Calming me down.
- Calm the central nervous system down.

- Are you doing a round basket?
- On this thing.

I hope to have two ropes there.

And two ropes there. And in-between have three ears of corn that come down from the centre.

- I've got a pair of scissors! - It's totally different.

It's Planet Janet, Mary.

Janet is the only baker using a tricky wholemeal dough basket

to go with her apple and walnut granary rolls and her sage and red onion cottage rolls.

The basket is my only concern.

In wholemeal flour, the gluten level's lower,

which means the glue can break.

- So this is the triumphant wreath that goes atop the basket?
- It'll be stuck over the top.

This is great. Is this a heavy salt crust?

- It's very, very salted to keep it together.
- It'll get a colour on it?
- No, it doesn't colour.

- Will I be criticised for that? Probably.
- It's best not to wonder.

Best to say everything will be criticised and then not to worry!

- Wow!
- Hello.

- That looks like a hat to go to Ascot!
- Yasmin's intricate basket will be filled with pesto bread

and coconut rolls.

- Is this a salt dough?
- It is. I've made it twice. I made it with bread flour

and I could tell it was much stiffer because it's a stronger flour.

- I've gone back to plain flour.
- Why?
- Because it was really stiff

- and not pliable at all.
- Just add more water.
- ..I like it like this.

- Yeah, she wants to do it.
- You prefer plain flour?
- This is one thing I might have up on you.

15 years of childcare teaches you something about salt dough.

- Play-Doh!
- She's laying down the gauntlet.

When I look at that basket, I'm not seeing overall master plan. What's the end goal?

- I thought big and chunky actually looks more like bread.
- Yeah.
- And looks like a bread basket,

which I figure is what they want. But I just want to get it in and started, then it holds its shape.

The baskets are first baked at a low temperature so the dough hardens.

After the initial bake, the basket should be solid and free-standing when the mould is removed.

Whoa! Is that Janet's?

That's amazing!

Take a look at it - it's collapsing.

I've got to try to put this piece on the top and put it back in the oven.

Just say a prayer for me.

OK, that's 10 minutes remaining, everyone. Just 10 minutes.

Time may be running out, but remove the baskets too soon and they might not be strong enough for the rolls.

Em...

It's not as elegant or as lovely as I'd like it, but hopefully with a nice egg wash

it'll look like bread.

- Now what are those shapes there?
- Little duckies.
- Of course!

Yes. So I'm hoping if my bread rolls aren't any good,

my strategy is to create a diversion. Baking for survival, you know?

I could be going out. All you can do is get in here and do your best.

The whole thing's collapsed. I'm very disappointed.

I don't know what I can do now. It's just gone completely.

Don't worry. You see, these things are sent to try us.

This basket is a thing of great beauty. Or do I wear it as a hat?

It's like trying to make a jigsaw with no picture to go with it.

I'm very sad, really.

Some of these baskets are causing great trouble. They do need a different skill to make them.

It's danger zone for a few people. You've got a few of them now.

OK, that's one minute, everybody. One minute remaining.

Ladies and gentlemen, this is it. Please move away from your baskets and the breads therein.

Your time is up.

Mary and Paul must now judge each baker's offering individually before discussing who they think

should leave the Great British Bake Off.

Yasmin, please step forward.

Technically, your basket looks great. I was a bit worried about the amount of holes.

- What have we got here, Yasmin?
- - Sweet bread with coconut. - Very light.

They're delicious. They taste great. It's the texture and the smell of that crumb. It's really nice.

- Are these the pesto?
- Yeah.

Pesto goes well with bread, I think.

- The bake is superb and the basket is really, really nice.
- Thank you.

- What do we have here, Ian?
- The little ones are walnut and raisin

and the back are cracked wheat.

This was a very tight texture when you were rolling it out.

And what have we got? A tight-textured roll.

And these little fellas, I'm not getting flavour.

The whole thing looks really posh, but the actual rolls when you get into them,

that ones very close and there's not much flavour to that.

The basket looks great. Technically, very good. It's very well done.

It tastes very good, but for some it might be too crusty.

- That's lovely.
- It's beautiful.
- It's well-baked.

Looks good. I'd like to see them a little bit smaller, but technically all good.

Wow!

- Wow.
- You've nailed it.

- On visual appearance.
- Thank you.
- It looks great.

Those chocolate ones I'm fascinated to taste.

The texture of it is moist, but it is, on your mouth, very, very dry.

I don't find it dry. I find it a lovely texture.

The only thing it needs is butter.

Did you design the basket to lurch forward like that?

I'd like to say yes, but no.

- It needed more support.
- Remind us about them.

A lemon and poppy seed roll.

- Salt.
- Mm. As stated earlier, you need more salt.

All I'm getting is lemon. That's it.

These look sadly underproofed.

They stopped proofing. I don't know if the yeast died.

- They're absolutely solid.
- I have to do my job.

- You've got too much salt in there.
- Oh? OK.

The salt must have tipped in there.

I must have put salt instead of sugar. That's what's caused it.

The most important part of baking is weighing up. Mess up there, you mess up the whole line.

It's a great-looking basket and it's edible.

- Lots of flavours in there.
- A little bit over-baked on the ones at the back that you've tucked in.

The basket looks a bit, em...

sparse.

- This is the lemon.
- The lemon and coriander.

- The coriander doesn't come through.
- Do you remember the recipe?

10 grams of salt... Actually, no, it would be 5 grams of salt.

- Yes, that's more like it!
- Yes, it would be 5 grams of salt.

I toyed with putting more in, but I don't like a lot of salt in it.

I thought it was the right amount.

Salt is your killer every time.

- Chilli and halloumi.
- These are chilli rolls to me.
- Yeah, they are.

Halloumi will just get murdered.

- Last but not least...
- Ah, Janet.

- Because of the gluten levels in wholemeal flour, it's not strong.
- OK.
- That's part of why it collapsed.

- Sometimes disasters happen. - Yeah.

- Can you tell me what we've got here?
- These are sage and onion.

- That's lovely and springy.
- The bake is great, texture superb.

- Thank you.
- It needs a little bit more salt and a few more onions.

- Thanks, Janet.
- Thank you.

'They have to make the decision,'

but it should be on merit. And, you know, if I don't deserve to stay, that's fair enough.

By no means a bad judging. Whether it's enough to keep me in remains to be seen.

I would be slightly shocked if I went, but I did horrendously last week, so it wouldn't be unexpected.

I'm disappointed, I'm scared now still that I'll be the one to go home. He didn't like the flavours.

It does make me feel quite upset that I seem to be getting it right on the textures and construction

and not right on the flavour.

It's decision time for Paul and Mary.

Have you had a chance to consider who this week's Star Baker is?

I think that Yasmin has really pulled the stops out.

She's finished with a finale of beautiful rolls

- and a beautiful basket.
- Yes.

I also think Mary-Anne has done particularly well. She's got some fantastic ideas.

On the other end of the scale, who might be in danger?

I think Urvashi performed not so well. She tried so hard. She was dedicated and dying to do well,

- but she didn't quite get there.
- She was second from bottom on the focaccia.

Rob has got to be in there again. After last week, I'm very aware of everything Rob does.

His basket today collapsed and the flavours were not good.

Ian's not had a brilliant weekend.

- Ian was bottom in his focaccia. His courgette bread...
- So heavy, that loaf.

I remember lifting it and I thought, "What's in this?"

- And today we had two rolls which looked immaculate.
- What a disappointment!

It's very important to us - as well as looking brilliant, it's got to taste good.

Janet with the disaster of her basket has got to be in there. She's been middling.

As we start reducing numbers down, you sharply become in the target zone.

The pool of danger zone people is quite large - four, potentially.

You have your choice between Rob, Janet, Urvashi and Ian.

- For me, it's very, very close.
- Mm.

- Do you think that two or one should go?
- Good question.

You know the score by now.

The judges have decided on their verdict. Let's start with the positive. The judges felt somebody

really, really impressed so the person we are giving the title of Star Baker to is...

Yasmin.

Well done, Yasmin. well done.

Sadly, of course, as you know,

there is a person or maybe two people...

that have failed to make the grade this week.

And those two people are...

Ian

and Urvashi.

We're very sorry to see you go.

Urvashi went because, sadly, she was very poor on her flavours.

She made a beautiful-looking loaf, but it didn't have enough flavours.

I'd have loved to stay in the competition a little bit longer, but it is a competition.

There's obviously things they've seen in other people, but not in me.

I've given it my best shot every week.

It has, in a funny kind of way, given me confidence, so overall I think I'm happy.

Ian left today because he was ranked bottom in his signature loaf and bottom in the focaccia.

Today, although his breads did look OK, there was no substance to them. There was no flavour.

Yeah, I'm gutted and disappointed and I'm a bit sad,

but I will always have a love of baking.

If anything, this has added to it.

I can't believe I got Star Baker on the bread week. It's the ultimate accolade.

I am really proud of myself.

And I can't wait to tell my husband!

Losing two people has made it more real that it could be you at any point.

Only one person won't go through it - the winner.

Start practising in the morning.

- Next time...
- You never know.
- ..it's the battle of the biscuits.

- Crunch time in the signature bake.
- I can't bear to look.

'Mary Berry sets a tortuous technical challenge.' Brandy snaps!

It's hard to fill in. Oh, no. God.

And a Showstopper that features nearly 1,000 macaroons.

I personally think that's enough.

- Whose cookie is about to crumble?
- Jason's doesn't work, really.

- And whose biscuits will bring an end to their Bake Off?
- The train is coming. I'll just let it hit me.

Week four of our search to find Britain's best amateur baker.

We've had tiered celebration cakes, magnificent platters of tarts and enough bread to feed 5,000.

Or loosely translated, enough bread to feed Mel and myself.

We started with 12 bakers and now there are eight.

Welcome to the Great British Bake Off.

Britain's home bakers have come together in this,

the ultimate test of their baking skills.

To win you need to be able to perform across the board.

I haven't left the house. Locked in my kitchen.

Last week was bread.

It's a bit scary. You just want it to work. You want it to be right.



And Paul's expectations were high.

- Someone's not been following my recipe.
- The whole thing's collapsed.

Yasmin really impressed and was named star baker.

Well done, Yasmin.

But Urvashi and Ian didn't make the grade and were sent home.

Outstanding!

This week, the bakers take on biscuits.

I don't know if I can bear to look at them.

It looks very dishevelled.

And these bite-size delights prove too much for some.

This is the worst they've come out.

Please, God, let me finish.

Yes, things are getting serious, for this week the contestants

will be getting themselves into a right royal flap...jack.



Today the bakers are facing biscuitgeddon.

It's the fourth round of the Bake Off. This week, it's biscuits.

Our bakers will need to prove they can deliver outstanding bakes

in three increasingly more testing challenges.

Tomorrow, for one person,

their dream of becoming Britain's best amateur baker will be over.

Welcome, bakers, to this, the halfway mark of the Bake Off.

So well done for getting this far,

but there's no time to relax, because it's time for your first challenge, the signature bake.

So what the judges would like you to do is to make 12 biscuits

to your own very distinct flavour combination and, of course,

you have to remember that the ideal biscuit, well,

is something that Mel and I will trough, but also has a distinct bite.

So it's not too soft, and it's not too crumbly.

You have one and a half hours on the clock.

- On your marks.
- Get set.
- Bake!

Unlike cakes or bread, a biscuit is much more delicate.

Unforgiving in the oven, within seconds they can catch and burn,

ruining both taste and texture.

To achieve perfection requires precision.

The humble biscuit can be quite deadly.

Easy enough to bake, you think, but, actually, to bake them

all the same colour with the same flavour is extremely difficult.

The biscuits should be crisp, and if they're meant to be chewy,

they should be chewy. They should all be uniform in shape.

It should tempt me to eat it, and when you break it,

it should have a perfect texture and be done right through.

The essential biscuit ingredients are butter, sugar and flour.

When I was practising, I made these biscuits about twice.

The first time they were OK, a bit overcooked.

But the second time they came out and tasted a lot nicer.

Well, not a lot nicer, they were nice the first time.

Jason taught himself how to bake from the age of just 12.

His signature biscuit is called a lebkuchen,

which is a traditional, soft-spiced German treat.

They're not that hard. They're softer, which I'm worried about.

I don't know what the judges will say. They've got spice in them.

I'm using mixed spice and cinnamon,

and with chocolate on the top. It's a nice combination.

Rob grew up with baking.

His mother taught him how to cook from the age of ten.

My brother and dad would go to the football and I'd stay at home

and help my mum make pastries. It was great.

For one Christmas, and I've still got beef with this,

my sister got a rolling pin, a little child's rolling pin,

And it had "Hannah" on it. I never had one. So Hannah had a rolling pin. Mum had a rolling pin.

Well, where's mine?

Today he's baking a family favourite, chocolate and ginger oat biscuits.

Chewy on the inside with a crunchy exterior.

My granny always used to have them at her house.

We always used to call them rejects.

It's cos they don't come in a packet. They come in a see-through bag which reminds me of home,

and just it being warm and comforting and nice.

The biscuits I'm making today are grandmother's biscuits,

so they're the sort of thing that I'd sit in front of the telly with,

a cup of tea, and something I love to eat.

Hopefully the judges will enjoy them.

Ben's hoping for success with his crunchy version of stem ginger nuts,

which is a recipe he learnt from his grandmother.

- Hello, Ben.
- Good morning. Good morning. Good morning!

What's in these?

It's basically flour, ginger powder.

There's a piece of stem ginger and also some candied ginger in there as well.

- So a lot of ginger flavour.
- What temperature do you bake these at?

- These are going to be baked at 190.
- Right.
- For about ten minutes.

- Yeah.
- But there is a look and feel thing, so I don't want them

to be too brown on the edges and burnt underneath.

Flour and eggs keep biscuits together.

When the proteins in them are uncooked, they are small,

tightly-coiled, separate strands.

But heat causes them to unravel and fuse together to form a solid mass.

Concentrating on the appearance this week,

so fingers crossed it all works out.

Sausage-fingers does dainty!

Mary-Anne's signature biscuits are called Melting Moments.

The high butter content and use of cornflour gives them

a crumbly, melt-in-the-mouth quality.

I chose it because it's an anytime biscuit.

You wouldn't have to go out and do a special shop

if you wanted to make this, because you could literally

open the cupboard and pull out what you need.

Once again Mary-Anne is showcasing her love of using

inventive techniques to turn her biscuits into something special.

Before I put the dough in the piping bag

I did a stripe of red food colouring down the side,

so I think it's the same principle of toothpaste.

I'm going to put them in the freezer now for 15 minutes,

and that will sort of freeze them,

so that when they go in the oven the heat of the oven will hopefully cook the swirls a lot quicker

and retain some of the nice shape.

Like Mary-Anne,

Holly is also making a delicate, melt-on-the-tongue biscuit.

I just thought these were the sort of biscuit

that you might serve at an afternoon tea for ladies.

Using home-made jam and custard cream as the filling,

she's named hers Strawberry and Custard Melts.

- Oh, you've piped them already. That was quick.
- Yeah.
- How have you made the mix, then?

It is creamed butter, very, very soft,

with a bit of icing sugar.

Instead of the cornflour, a little bit of custard powder and plain flour.

- So it's kind of one-mouthful delights.
- Yeah.

- Those are tiny, delicate.
- They're very delicate.

- They're very small, aren't they?
- But when you've got two together, with the filling,

I personally think that's enough.

- And you're making a quick strawberry jam?
- Yeah.
- How are you doing that?

You haven't got much time to do that.

- Are you doing a very small amount?
- Oh, she'll do it in no time.
- It's four minutes.
- Minutes.

It's a bit girlie, isn't it, the hearts?

So I like the hearts.

Jo's signature bake is a recipe she developed herself,

a lightly-fragranced and crumbly lavender biscuit.

Everyone will like them, but it's a really different flavour,

because lavender's not something that you come across every day,

but I really like them. I think they're really summery and a lovely flavour.

In last week's bread round, Yasmin dazzled the judges

and was named star baker.

Up until last week I felt that I'd gone relatively unnoticed.

I was like, you know, flying under the radar a bit,

and now there's pressure because they'll be looking at me more.

Yasmin has chosen to bake a chocolate chip and pistachio biscotti,

which are Italian dry twice-baked biscuits.

A biscotti, you can add so many things to it,

whether it be honey, walnut, pistachios, but it's all about the baking.

- Yeah.
- You've got to get that crisp,

because if you don't get that crisp it's not a biscotti.

Bakers! One hour has gone. You've got half an hour to go.

I've got two more to do, then I can shove them in the oven.

The success of their biscuits rests heavily on that critical baking time.

I hope they bake well.

I hope they don't get overdone like they did at home.

It's very easy to over-bake biscuits.

You lose the consistency across the batch and they'll be overcooked.

It's a waiting game and a praying game.

And hoping that it's actually going to do what it needs to do

and look fantastic, and everything goes to plan.

So, fingers crossed.

Now, delicious as those biscuits in the tent look,

they won't do your waistline any favours.

But back in the 18th century,

eating biscuits on a diet was actually encouraged.

In Georgian Bath, one particular biscuit

became part of Britain's first ever calorie-controlled diet.

Well, the whole of the 18th century is a century of appetite,

so the mealtimes, in particular, are about excess, copious quantities

of cream, cheeses, syllabubs, jellies,

and, of course, lots of wine, port wine.

All of this excess led, of course, to swelling waistbands,

indigestion and gout.

There was a nation of extremely unhealthy rich people.

One medical practitioner believed that the solution lay not only

in bathing in the waters,

but in his invention of a new, low-calorie diet.

Dr William Oliver decided that he would develop a biscuit.

And this biscuit has now become known as the Bath Oliver biscuit.

It's a very unusual biscuit with almost no sugar in it at all.

It's low in calories, and with this biscuit, Dr Oliver thought

he could control the waistlines of the wealthy

and he could aid digestion because the biscuits had yeast in them.

For 15 years, Dr Oliver prescribed a diet of Bath Oliver biscuits,

eaten whilst sat in the spa water.

By reducing his patients' excessive consumption,

he dramatically improved their health.

Shortly before he died, Dr Oliver bestowed his secret biscuit recipe

to his long-serving coachman, Atkins.

He then decided to mass market the product,

and set up his own biscuit baking business.

Over 250 years later, the simple savoury biscuit has become

a popular addition to a cheese board.

And in complete antithesis to Dr Oliver's original enterprise,

is now available completely covered in rich dark chocolate.

20 minutes to go.

The biscuits are still in the oven,

but time is running out.

The trouble is that when you do them at home, you don't look in the oven all the time,

you just trust they're doing. Here, you become neurotic, and I'm trying to resist the temptation

because it's irrevocable anyway, now.

Ben's keen to do his grandma's ginger nut recipe proud.

With the sugar and everything that's in them, they can occasionally catch.

So I've done a few at home, and some of them

were a little darker underneath than I'd have liked.

So what I want to try and do is just make sure that I get a nice, even bake.

A nice colour on the top.

And there's lots of things I'm looking at.

So I'm watching them like a hawk.

I'm reasonably pleased with how they're looking.

I'd like more of a crack on top.

But it is actually, you know, it is getting it, it's fine.

I'm one of those people who like to prod and poke and see if everything's OK.

And actually, I've got to resist and just not touch them

cos they disintegrate really easily.

This was given me by a very dear aunt who died in '96,

and she gave it me when my children were small, for Christmas.

You know, to put stuff on.

So I always use this plate for these biscuits at Christmas.

Janet's making her own invention, Christmas biscuits.

A festive favourite using marzipan,

which has a tendency to ooze out when baked.

It's because the marzipan expands inside

and there's no room for it, except coming through the top.

No-one can control volcanoes.

You've got ten minutes to go.

Ten minutes to go, gang.

I don't know whether to put chocolate on or not,

cos I don't know whether they necessarily need it.

I don't know whether it's just a bit of a bad idea.

I'm trying to cool my chocolate down

but I don't want to put it in the fridge cos sometimes it can go a little bit white in the fridge.

So I just want to try and set it.

- Morning, Jason.
- Hello, Jason.
- Good morning, all.

I've just got the decoration left to do.

So I'm going to... I still haven't decided what I'm doing.

This is your signature biscuit.

This is something you make often and so you should know how to finish it.

I did at home. I'm still throwing ideas round. There'll be chocolate and mixed peel on top.

- He's always working...
- So wait and see.
- Yeah, Paul.

- So you're finished now, essentially. You're just finishing them off?
- Yeah.
- OK.

It's not just a normal buttercream, is it?

No. This is a variation I found called Depression Era buttercream,

which is, rather than using just sugar and butter,

it's sort of padded out, almost,

with a flour and milk mixture that's cooked until it's thickened.

Is this the Great Depression in America in '30s?

I think so, yes. I found several people commenting online that their mothers made it

or their grandmothers made it.

So you've essentially made a contemporary austerity biscuit.

- Yes.
- For the credit crunch times.

I'm going to drench these in chocolate.

I've thinned it down with a bit of vegetable oil.

Just put a nice thin layer over all of it.

But I don't want too much chocolate, or it'll be overkill,

cos the biscuits are thin.

White, unlike milk and dark chocolate, contains no cocoa solids,

but instead, the fatty content of the bean - cocoa butter.

This, mixed with vegetable oil, creates a loose consistency.

The white chocolate probably won't set in time. I'm going to flash it in the freezer for what time I have.

That's one minute to go, bakers.

They've just got to cool now.

Just a little bit of purpley colour to show the lavender, and a little bit of gold.

Just for my finishing little bit of sparkle.

There we go. All done.

Time is up, ladies and gents of the baking world. Your time is up.

The bakers must now face judgment for their signature biscuit.

A festival of daintiness.

They look like little gems. They look really pretty and sweet.

They've lost some of their shape in the oven.

If you wanted a little bit more definition you could have fridged them before you baked them.

- And you had plenty of time.
- Mmm, that is melty.
- It's got a good melt.

- Well melty.
- It's got a good colour. The flavours are great.

- The taste is actually great. You are getting the ginger.
- The middle is scrummy.

- The only thing is, they're slightly over-baked.
- Yeah.

And if you move along here, this one's very over-baked.

That's why it wasn't at the front!

- So you basically tried to hide that one?
- Yeah, that was just being covered up a bit.

This is Miss Marple here you're dealing with.

We are looking for originality,

and this is a family recipe that you really enjoy.

You've done a lot. You're totally confident with.

You have a beautiful flavour. I love the marzipan.

I'd like to have seen a bit more colour lifted up on the top.

The appearance of the top is lovely. That nice crackle on the top.

- You've caught a few of them there.
- Ah, yeah.
- Yeah.

Yes, you have. For my taste, I think it's slightly over-gingered.

But I like ginger and I always have, so my ginger nuts are always a bit

hotter and my grandmother's ginger nuts were always a bit hotter,

- which is why I've put quite a bit of ginger in.
- I like the flavour of ginger,

- but the burn that comes is, for me, too much.
- OK.

These I think are a very good example of something that's really

difficult to make, but I would have liked a lot more nuts in it.

The thing about a biscotti is it's dense with flavour.

- Yeah.
- And you've got large areas of big, empty crust.

The texture's excellent.

It's very, very good, but for me, a biscotti should be absolutely

- rammed full of whatever you're putting in there.
- Yeah.

What's making it bitter?

It's lavender. But it's not a lavender you recognise.

- It's a very difficult thing to use, lavender.
- Yeah. I just thought

I like them and I just thought it was something different.

It's just not working, that lavender, is it?

No. I've nearly finished one and I'm not getting it coming through at all.

Is this the way you wanted them to look?

Once I decided how I wanted them to look, this is it, and I'm very pleased with how they look.

You're very pleased. For me, it doesn't look like a biscuit. It looks more like a pudding.

The chocolate didn't need anything with it, if it was a thin coating.

The flavour of that cinnamon with the mixed spice is very strong.

Jason, this doesn't work, really.

- The look of them, they look great.
- Thank you.

I'd never have thought of putting colouring in, just a swirl.

- So pretty.
- Mmm, it's beautiful.

- And the filling is good.
- Thank you.

I think the flavour of the biscuit is baked extremely well.

Thank you.

It does melt. The flavour in that is really nice as well.

It looks very professional.

- So good.
- Well done.
- Thank you very much.

- I'm just going to keep this for research purposes.
- OK, OK.

The judges felt Mary-Anne excelled with her signature bake.

But Jason, Ben, Yasmin and Jo failed to impress.

I'm really, really happy with the biscuit

and the comments they made, and it turned out just the way I wanted.

If my gran was here, she'd probably be chasing Paul down the road,

cos those were an old family recipe.

We love ginger.

I didn't think they were too hot.

So, watch out, Paul, cos Gran will probably be after you.

After the originality of the signature bake, the second challenge is a technical one.

The recipe the bakers are about to be given is a complete surprise.

Onwards, bakers.

It's the technical challenge.

Now, Paul and Mary have chosen a special challenge for you today,

and as we all know, they will judge it blind.

Paul and Mary, if you would please vacate the tent, thank you very much.

What we'd like you to do is to make 24...

..brandy snaps.

OK. We need them to be of equal colour.

We need them to be of equal size

and we'd like them filled with whipped cream.

We are giving you just one and a half hours on the clock.

On your marks. Get set.

Bake them snaps.

Brandy snaps are tubular and lacy brittle biscuits flavoured

with ginger and usually served filled with whipped cream.

Unlike the name suggests, not all recipes include brandy

as an ingredient, including this one.

Bakers are all given the same ingredients and a basic recipe.

If they are to produce successful brandy snaps,

they must use their baking knowledge to fill in the gaps.

I chose brandy snaps because it's all about timing and precision.

It's really accurate weighing, to start with.

That's the most important thing.

And it'll be very easy to see who has got it just right.

The recipe requires butter, sugar, syrup,

sifted flour with ground ginger, and finally, lemon juice.

One of the things that they've got to concentrate on is dissolving the sugar,

and you have to have patience to do it over a low heat,

and you just do it with a wooden spoon

so that you can feel no grit at the bottom of the pan.

There's a danger that the mixture can burn or caramelise.

Then they must take it off the heat and cool it for a moment,

cos otherwise, if you add the flour it could go in lumpy.

Then the little bit of lemon juice.

I've never made these before, I'm well scared.

I was talking to my mum this week and we were talking about what the technical challenge could be,

and the first thing that she thought it could be is brandy snaps,

and she said, "Just in case, just make sure you watch a video

"or something of how to make them." And I didn't get round to it.

So I'm a bit gutted.

I went through Mary's baking bible and chose all the things that I had never made that looked difficult.

And brandy snaps were the only one I managed to actually end up doing.

I guessed right, so that's good.

Ben's signature bake was not as well received as he'd hoped.

I'm really disappointed, actually.

Not going to over-think it.

I'm just going to crack on with this and hopefully redeem myself somewhat.

So how do you pick yourself up when you get news like that?

With me I just get on with it.

Whether I do well or not, I just get on with it.

You are Teflon, Jason.

- Never made a brandy snap before?
- Never in my life.

- Ever eaten a brandy snap before?
- I don't think so.
- No.

Teaspoons of the mixture need to be spaced at least 10cm apart

to avoid spreading into one another.

"Place four portions of mixture on the Bake-O-Glide."

How much is a portion?

Oh, it's getting too complicated

and I've only got an hour and a half!

20 minutes in, and the first of the three batches of snaps

go into the oven.

I'm a bit concerned about the timings, cos it's a lot -

24, when you can only get 4 on each.

It's a lot of trays to get in. I need to get more trays going.

With just half an hour left to go in the technical challenge,

the batches of the brandy snaps are at their most critical stage.

I think maybe burning them could be quite possible

cos of the high sugar content.

It's like when you make caramel.

They bake in the oven for around about eight minutes, or until

the mixture is well spread and dark golden.

Jo is experiencing problems as her batch lacks colour and is still soft.

I thought if I just followed the recipe, they'd be all right.

If brandy snaps are over-cooked or undercooked,

they will not curl properly.

It's just not gone right today.

Rob's found his own method of shaping the brandy snaps.

Rob, what went wrong here, love?

No, no, no. It's not what's gone wrong, it's...

I'm cutting them out using a cutter.

Oh. These are quite weenie.

Mmm, I figure if they were all exactly the same size.

And brandy snaps, kind of, are so sweet, though.

- Yeah.
- They're meant to be like a two-bite kind of thing.
- Yeah.

- I just think they look quite nice.
- Yeah. No, absolutely.

The hardest decision to make is when to start curling.

You've got this little window of about a minute between them

being soft enough to roll and too brittle.

No, don't sink, don't sink.

Need asbestos fingers.

It's just very painful. It's almost like torture.

SHE SIGHS

It's so frustrating.

Jo is still baffled that her brandy snaps looks nothing like they should.

The strict time limit of the technical challenge

leaves no room for error.

Oh, what it might have been is my oven was on the wrong temperature.

My oven was on defrost.

I couldn't figure out what I was doing wrong.

But I didn't think to look at the oven because, you know,

I thought it would be on the right temperature.

I really hope that I don't go home over such a stupid mistake.

The final stage is filling the brandy snaps.

Bakers, keep those nozzles piping.

You've got ten minutes to go.

But the snaps must be cooled first, or the cream will melt.

Please, please, please. Where's the breeze when you want it?

Oh, gosh, it's hard to fill, isn't it?

Oh, no. Oh, oh, gosh.

Oh, no.

Don't do this to me.

Aye-aye, Captain!

SHE LAUGHS

One minute to go, bakers.

Please, God, let me finish.

Nightmare.

OK, that's time up, everyone. Time is up.

If you'd like to bring your brandy snaps up and put it just behind the picture of yourself.

The judging of the technical bake is unlike any other challenge.

As Mary and Paul have seen nothing of the baking process,

they won't know whose is whose.

They come in all shapes and sizes, don't they?

I want to see which one's got the best snap.

Shall we start here, then, Mary?

- They're nice and lacy.
- It's very thick, though.

I think they're too big - it's been slightly overdone.

The colour's very dark.

- These ones are a lot lighter.
- They're all different sizes.

Someone's been hiding things at the bottom.

They don't snap.

A brandy snap should snap.

These are sort of cocktail-sized.

Why are they so small?

It's crisp, but it doesn't have that snap quality,

- which is what you want.
- It's too small for the amount of mixture.

Very inconsistent. There's no consistency in colour. The flavour's OK.

The flavour's OK and it's lovely and crisp.

This is a mess.

Something's gone wrong here.

They're too pale.

They're like rubber.

These look rather nice.

These look great, actually.

We have to go to the bottom to see what's there.

They're all consistent in their shape, aren't they?

And it's got a good crunch.

These are consistent in size.

They're thin. They're crispy.

Nice colour.

Just a little bit under-whipped cream.

They're all pretty much the same length.

- Now we have to decide.
- We do.

Mary and Paul must rank all the brandy snaps

from the worst to the best.

OK. We've made our decisions,

and the person in last place is this one.

- Jo, basically it was under-cooked.
- Yeah.
- Mix went a bit wrong.

You need to leave it in the oven longer.

Well, I turned my oven on to defrost by accident.

Ah, that doesn't help!

And the next one in line at number seven is this one here.

These are very tiny little people.

I cut them out so that they were all exactly the same size.

Well, that is an unnecessary occupation, really.

And in sixth place is this one.

- Me.
- Very inconsistent. Some of them are soft. Some of them are crispy.

- Some haven't been in the oven long enough.
- And in fifth place...

These are over-baked. They look lovely and lacy,

but they were a bit hard.

- And the next place is this one. Number four.
- It's me.

Janet, these aren't bad. They're a bit inconsistent with colour.

You're right.

And in third place...

These are a beautiful, even shape.

It was very tricky, actually, between first and second,

but it was purely based on consistency of colour. Number two is this one.

Mary-Anne, not bad. The cream wasn't whisked enough to sit inside.

That leaves us with just one.

And this is in first place. HE LAUGHS

Baked to perfection. Beautifully lacy. What more could we ask?

Well done, everyone.

I was very shocked. I was really excited. Made my day. Especially from this morning,

I don't know what happened there, but it's given me a boost of confidence.

I do feel really gutted that I, you know, mucked up so ridiculously.

I just feel like it's such a stupid thing to do.

But I've just got to accept it, really, and, you know, move on.

It's the final challenge of the biscuit week.

This is their last opportunity to impress Mary and Paul.

One baker will soon be hanging up their apron.

So, Mary, Paul, who is in trouble?

Well, I think Ben's in trouble.

He made ginger biscuits.

They were so strong of ginger, they were just overpowering.

It was like a spice grenade, wasn't it?

And also his brandy snaps. They were dark, over-baked.

So he hasn't covered himself in glory.

For me, Jo. Because Jo's biscuits were OK, but the lavender did not come through.

Her brandy snaps were not good, either.

Then you've got to bring in Yas.

Yasmin's biscotti, for me, technically, too simple to make.

It needed more pistachio.

Bakers, this is your final bake. You're going to need to show your baking skills,

but you're also going to have to unleash that creative side.

Because it's the show-stopper challenge, and we're asking you

to raise the bar and make a macaroon display, no less.

The judges are going to be looking for three different flavours of macaroons,

and also your flair at displaying them.

You've got five hours to bake 120 macaroons, which will be sandwiched in 60 pairs.

So there's no time to waste. Very best of luck. On your marks, get set...

BOTH: Bake.

Macaroons are notoriously difficult to make.

There are four stages. Mixing, resting, baking and filling.

Five hours seems like a long time for this bake,

but in reality it's never a long time, I don't think.

I'm looking for the best macaroons in this show-stopper.

A smooth, glossy finish. A gooey centre.

A nice crust on the outside. A great colour.

And ultimately a fantastic flavour.

Standard macaroon recipes use ground almonds

together with egg whites and sugar.

There are two different types of meringue used to make macaroons - French and Italian.

The French method folds caster sugar into beaten egg whites, which must then rest before baking.

The Italian way replaces caster sugar with a hot sugar syrup.

It has to get to 118 degrees, so it's pretty important.

It's to make sure the meringue's really stable.

If it's not stable, the macaroons will drop. This is kind of the big...

It's probably the most important bit apart from mixing.

The heat of the molten sugar partly cooks the meringues,

which means they require no resting time before baking.

Personally, I'm not too keen on almonds and meringue,

so it's not something that I've baked at all,

until two weeks ago. Now, I've baked hundreds!

Mary-Anne is making blackcurrant and mint,

gooseberry and elderflower and hazelnut macaroons.

She's following the Italian meringue method.

I have tried both methods

and I've found it difficult to judge with the French method

when to stop stirring, because if you over-mix it,

then it can't hold its shape and you end up just with a solid baking sheet of mixture.

This is definitely the hardest one so far.

After Jo's blunder with the oven temperature in the previous challenge,

she now needs to keep her cool and focus.

How are you?

- Yes, I'm OK, thank you.
- No stress?

- I don't know about that!
- Don't peak now. You've got five hours to build that stress!

- How are you going to present it?
- I'm doing them on a French flag.

- You're doing a tricolour.
- On a French flag?!
- Yeah.

- On the Great British Bake Off?
- Yes.
- Come on, we're friends!

You need to forget that. It was a long time ago. Waterloo is well and truly forgotten.

For both types of meringue, bakers need to be careful not to over-whisk the egg whites.

If they do, the proteins in the eggs will separate from the water molecules,

leaving them with a dry batter that's incapable of rising in the oven.

And then they must carefully sieve the ground almonds

before they add the colour and flavouring to ensure an even texture.

The introduction of the flavour could make or break a macaroon.

Too much, it'll break down the structural integrity of the macaroon,

so it'll collapse. Too little, you get no flavour.

Using essence or powdered flavouring is the best way to give the macaroon shells their taste.

I practised about 300 macaroons on Thursday.

You've got three different flavours to make.

You've got to try and mix things as you're trying to bake other things

and it's just a bit of a, kind of, nightmare.

So we'll see how it goes.

Ben has chosen the Italian meringue method to make his three flavours of macaroons.

Chocolate almond sandwiched with white chocolate,

raspberry and pine nut

and a pistachio macaroon filled with chocolate.

The graphic designer is in his element doing this.

They won't be that pink. They will soften when the meringue goes in.

I'm using pine nuts and almonds. Pine nuts have a lot of oil in them,

so if you just pine nuts, the mixture goes very soft,

and so you get odd-shaped macaroons.

- I'm using almond as well to give it...
- To stabilise it.
- ..body as well.

- Do you think the pine nuts will come through?
- They should do.

Macaroons generally are these dainty things in often quite unusual flavours.

They're quite grown-up, and I thought, wouldn't it be lovely

if I could introduce my son to the memories of my childhood chocolate bars?

Holly is using cocoa powder to flavour all three macaroons.

The fillings she's using are caramel, mint chocolate and chocolate orange.

I made them for the first time this year. My son tried one.

Absolutely loved them. He calls them "maca-oons".

Once the macaroon batter is made, bakers need to pipe the mixture. Making them uniform in size is key.

Yeah, I can pipe them.

It's the baking where it all kicks off.

It's really important that you create a volume to start with

and then you knock it out.

Hello, Holly, I saw you doing a very professional bang of the tray.

You're got to be firm with it, haven't you?

- You were disciplining those macaroons!
- I was disciplining the macaroons, yeah.

To create a smooth, shiny top, the batter should be left to rest for an hour,

or until a skin has formed over the macaroon.

Everything's so precise about this baking and I'm just not.

I'm more of a bit of this and a bit of that, and everything has to be spot on.

I just decided I'll do one batch at a time,

otherwise I'll just confuse myself.

Yasmin's making French meringue to create her three macaroons -

lime sandwiched with chocolate ganache, coffee with walnuts

and coconut with pineapple.

It is really easy to lose track of what you're doing. I find it a daunting task, anyway.

What did I just put in there?

120, 120.

- Yasmin has classic flavour combinations.
- The flavours that she's got on there are great.

She hasn't rested them for long. She hasn't knocked the air out.

So you're going to get blown macaroons.

Look at that perfect amount of mix. Hey, hey.

Jason is being inventive with his mocktail-inspired recipe.

He's chosen French meringue for his mojito,

cranberry cooler

and pina colada macaroons.

I suppose it is odd, because I don't drink, but it's more the flavours that I'm going for.

It's not going to be identical, because these are solid and the drinks are liquid.

I really like playing around with flavours.

And chocolate will go with a lot of strong, strong flavours.

Ginger doesn't go with loads of things. It goes with chocolate.

Huge flavours can be mixed with chocolate. It's incredible.

Using French meringue, Rob's typically being adventurous with his flavours.

He's making strawberry and lime,

lemon and chocolate macaroons with a cardamom-flavoured filling.

- Be careful with the cardamom. Don't go mad.
- It's very strong.

You don't want to have that almost numbing feeling in your mouth afterwards.

You should be left with a sweet tang.

Macaroon makers, this is your half time shout-out.

You've got two and a half hours to go.

With 120 perfect macaroons to produce...

Nightmare.

..time is against our bakers.

Only the first batches are ready to bake.

It's really hard to use an oven that isn't yours for something that's so temperamental.

Cooking time can be anywhere from 12 to 18 minutes.

It's always very nervous waiting for the first batch to come out and see what they look like.

I'm hoping that these are going to just rise nicely,

because I have done them before and they've cracked. So we'll just have to see.

In as little as 60 seconds, a macaroon can go from flawless to failure.

Whilst a plate of freshly-baked biscuits is definitely a cause for celebration,

there was a time when the arrival of a biscuit was the sign of a much more fearful occasion.

In Victorian times, funerals were incredibly grand affairs and could cost

as much as 50,000 in today's money.

By the mid-1800s, it was estimated that a quarter of the money in British banks

had been put aside to pay for them.

One essential expense was that of the funeral biscuit.

Today, we don't associate biscuits with funerals.

But, in the Victorian period, they were an essential element.

Funeral biscuits came in three main varieties.

Some were what we'd now recognise as ladies' fingers, or boudoir biscuits.

There are others which are like a slab of thin sponge cake.

And then the other kind, particularly from the Yorkshire Dales,

was a shortcake which was flavoured with caraway.

The first use of the biscuit was as an invitation.

Instead of just expecting people to turn up, they had to be bidden.

And you had a bidder. You went round with a basket with a cloth over the top with the biscuits in

and they'd knock on the house door, pass you your biscuit

and say you are bidden to the funeral of whoever it was,

lifting at so and so and burying at so and so.

To protect the fragile biscuits,

they were wrapped individually in white paper and sealed with a black wax.

They were often printed with traditional imagery and religious verse.

Making funeral biscuits actually took quite a lot of effort.

If you think about working

in conditions where you had to sieve the flour,

to actually break the sugar off a sugar cone and pound it up,

if you had to make 100 funeral biscuits, it was quite a tall order.

The caraway seeds would have been used for flavouring,

and it's possible that, originally, the seeds symbolised some kind of rebirth.

In comparison to modern shortbread, the recipe produced a very rich biscuit,

as it required ten ounces of butter to every 12 ounces of flour.

Once combined into a dough, equal parts were then separated and stamped

using a traditional mould.

This is actually a funeral biscuit mould.

Moulds were always wooden. It was what they had available.

And it's stamping the pattern on the top that really makes it a funeral biscuit.

The production of funeral biscuits continued across Britain into the 20th century until 1940,

when rationing tightened the belt of this Victorian tradition.

It's a nail-biting moment for the bakers as the first batches of macaroons are coming out.

I'm not happy with these ones.

Same mix I use at home, completely different results in this oven.

So they're just going to have to go on taste.

Oh, my God!

That says it all, doesn't it? Floor littered with remains.

Oh, that's a relief!

Jo is hoping her blueberry, coconut and strawberry macaroons will keep her in the competition.

- How are you feeling?
- Yeah, no, I feel OK. Yeah, I feel fine.

How many macaroons do you reckon you've made in the last week?

In the last week, I reckon I've made, no exaggeration, 500.

- There's a lot of macaroons floating around Essex!
- There is, yeah!

Oh, those look really perfect.

Yeah, they look pretty.

I don't know if I can bear to look at them.

- I have one macaroon, or six long macaroons.
- SHE LAUGHS

The French have a lot to answer for.

I'll put the next ones in for sacrifice now.

I just want them to be OK. I don't need them to be the best,

but I don't want to look like an idiot, you know.

A traditionalist, Janet is using French meringue

to make her raspberry, blackcurrant and almond macaroons.

Like her mother, she prefers baking wholesome, family food.

She used to make coloured meringues when we were little,

but, you know, like on Sundays she used to make a tray

twice as big as that of apple pie looking like the Himalayas, you know.

It wasn't sort of delicate baking she did at all.

Ben's still having difficulties with his macaroon shells.

There's nothing you can do when these things happen. Never give up.

Carry on going. See what happens. You never know what's going to happen.

- Last tray.
- OK, that's 30 minutes remaining, bakers! 30 minutes.

Start filling.

Macaroons can be sandwiched with jam, ganache or buttercream.

The finished product should be able to stand on its side

and not lose its filling.

I quite like it. It's almost therapeutic.

You're just running through doing the same things, really.

Yasmin's macaroons are all collapsing.

- Anything I can do, Yasmin?
- No. Thank you, though.

What is it that's been so awful about it?

Just not knowing. From start to finish,

I really have no idea what they're supposed to be like,

what the mixture's supposed to be like.

Even the finished product, what it's supposed to be like.

I didn't realise I'd get as emotional with baking,

but I think it's such a big thing in my household,

and throughout my life, I was brought up with baking.

My mother taught me to bake and she would have just been so incredibly proud of me...

..that I've gotten this far.

You've come a long way to be here. You've beaten all those other hundreds of people.

You've made it to the last eight.

I don't want to blow it at the last minute by doing something stupid.

That's what it is.

If I go out because other people are so much better

and I did everything I could,

but I've done something majorly wrong, and, you know, I've got myself to blame, really.

Don't be so hard on yourself. Serve 'em up. They're going to taste absolutely gorgeous.

- Hopefully, they'll come through on taste.
- You'll be fine. You'll be absolutely fine, my love.

Yasmin is not the only baker who's finding macaroons a challenge.

The mixture was looser because I added more liquid,

because I thought I could get more flavour into the actual shells

by adding elderflower cordial, and I did it before and it didn't work,

so I'm not really sure why I did it this time thinking it would work. Maybe magic.

OK, that's five minutes remaining.

This, for me, is the best bit.

You can bake something that's OK and present it in a way that people just don't expect

and they go, "That's fantastic."

Don't do that.

With only minutes to spare,

Mary-Anne still needs to pipe a whole batch of hazelnut macaroons.

Please tell me somebody else is working

and not all eyes are on me flapping around.

I've gone past panic into that calm where, you know,

the train is coming and I'm just going to let it hit me.

That's one minute to go, bakers!

Time up, everyone. Time up.

There are no second chances.

For one of these bakers it will be the last time they face the judges.

- Overall we've had a few disasters, haven't we?
- Yeah.

- It's disintegrated when you've put it in the oven.
- Yeah.

The crunch is good. It's got a good flavour as well.

You've got a little bit of a shine on that, but on the other two there is no shine at all.

This one is over-baked a bit.

Just too crisp.

Let's try the... This is the pina colada?

Yeah.

It's nice and chewy in the middle.

You've got the flavour coming through. It makes you smile.

It tastes so good. You can taste the orange.

Orange is lovely. And they look so pretty.

Janet, look at that.

- You see this big hole in there?
- Yes, I do.

And that means that it's very, very dry. This one looks better.

- See the inside of that?
- Excellent.

And you see how gooey it is? And that one tastes nice as well.

- Oh, good, I'm glad.
- That's a better macaroon.

Let's try again.

Too wet, and it's gone straight into the macaroon

and made it so soft and squidgy,

but having said that, they're absolutely delicious.

Nice and chewy.

Crisp on top. This one's got a lovely consistency in the middle.

This is just how a macaroon should be.

Crisp on the outside,

soft in the middle,

and they do taste of strawberries. That's what they're meant to be of.

- The presentation is unusual.
- It looks very dishevelled.

They're all different sizes.

They're horrendous.

The filling's fine. It's delicious.

Again, the mixture's too dry. That's what's caused that.

- A great big hole. Really dry.
- The flavour's nice.

This is the worst they've come out.

I did 300 on Thursday, and not a problem. Not a problem.

- And today...
- It's a disaster.
- ..it's all crashed.
- It is a disaster.

Visually they're great.

And you have got a shine

on pretty much all of them.

Delicious. Scrummy, aren't they?

The flavours are great. They look great.

This is a very good batch.

They are a little bit thin, but actually I think they're a very nice size.

This looks very neat and shiny on top. It's so difficult to get that shine quite right.

- Oh.
- Have you got it?

Too much cardamom. Far too much cardamom.

The first taste you have is lots of chocolate, sweetness, heavenly joy.

The last bit is leaving a dentist.

Comments weren't as good as I expected.

Chocolate and cardamom, I'll still stand by that.

I had one afterwards, I don't think there was too much cardamom at all.

There's winning to please the judges

and there's winning to please yourself.

So I can hold my head up high and say I did everything I wanted to do.

I'm so scared. I think I have a 50/50 chance of staying in the competition.

The judges must now assess the bakers' overall performance across the weekend.

They will then decide who to send home,

but first they need to choose who will become this week's star baker.

For me I was really surprised that I have to say Jason,

- although on the first day for me he was bottom of the biscuits.
- His lebkuchen. Yeah.

Since then he's got top, top.

Mary-Anne was doing brilliantly.

- A great day yesterday.
- Didn't she just?

But today has not been so good.

- Anybody else in contention?
- Yes. I mean Holly.

I think she was up there with her brandy snap,

and her biscuits were up there as well.

If we look at those who are

in real genuine danger of being sent home this week,

who's in the relegation spot?

- Ben.
- Today his macaroons were a disaster. Admitted by himself.

They were different sizes. Some of the flavours didn't work.

And I was really rather disappointed,

- because I thought he's a good baker.
- Yes.

Can I also throw in Yasmin as well?

Her biscotti needed attention.

She was certainly in the bottom half for the brandy snap,

and then when you looked at the macaroons today,

there were a couple of major disasters on there. It was a mess.

Bakers, what a good few days it's been.

We've seen frayed bottoms,

cracked tops and overstuffed middles, and now it's the moment of truth.

Mary and Paul have decided that this week

there are going to be two people...

..crowned star baker.

Firstly, the person who's shown consistency

and good taste across the Bake Off this time.

That person is Holly.

- Well done.
- Well done, Holly.

And secondly, rising like a phoenix

from the ashes of his lebkuchen,

- it's Jason.
- Well done, Jason.

Well done. Congratulations.

Now comes a slightly more onerous task.

You know what has to happen now.

The judges agreed that this week just one person would leave us.

And that person is...

..Ben. Sorry, Ben.

The rest of you, we shall see you next week when it all begins again.

I'm just disappointed.

He's had a pretty diabolical week.

His macaroons were terrible. His ginger nuts were far too hot.

He was fourth from bottom with the brandy snaps.

They were too thick and too dark.

It's sad, because in fact he'd done jolly well up until then.

I am proud. And I know friends and family will be proud of me as well.

I am going to enjoy being star baker,

especially because it's a joint star baker this time.

It's nicer because you share the victory with someone.

My mum will be chuffed when I tell her I'm star baker again.

Especially with all that's happened this particular weekend,

she'll really be excited about it.

I feel, phew.

I'm quite relieved to still be in it

but at the same time I'm now thinking about next week and getting stressed about that.

Next time, the bakers take on pies...

Your pastry is excellent. It's flaky. It's buttery.

I'm actually not comfortable with any of this recipe.

- ..showcasing their signature family pie...
- The chicken is overcooked.

You just can't taste anything. This is bland.

...miniature pork pies in the technical challenge...

There's something not right with the colour.

I'm really worried about the time, I'll have to work really fast.

..and show-stopping meringue pies.

- I was really pleased with mine until I saw yours.
- What a mess.

I can't fault it.

- But who will become the next star baker?
- Bam.

And whose Bake Off is about to end?

For the last five weeks, we've pitched our Bake Off tent in sunny, beautiful Essex,

where we've reduced our stock of hardworking, hand-picked bakers from 12 to just seven.

We've feasted on cakes, quiches, breads, tarts, and biscuits,

and I, for one, have room for more.

The remaining bakers have got two days of gruelling challenges

to find out if they've got what it takes to stay in the competition.

So welcome to the Great British Bake Off.

Last week, the bakers tackled biscuits

and Jason's flawless macaroons...

- They taste so good!
- ..saw him crowned Star Baker.

Along with Holly, who impressed the judges in all three challenges.



Delicious!

But someone had to go and three bad bakes...

- It is a disaster.
- They're horrendous.

..led to Ben leaving the Great British Bake Off.

I'm just disappointed.

This week the bakers confront pies, which drives some to despair...

A big disaster.

- What a mess.
- ..but brings out perfection in others.

I can't fault it.

Pies might be considered my weakness, so I can see the hazards ahead.

I was pleased with mine until I saw yours.

Bam.

The seven remaining bakers now face three daunting challenges

over the next two days -



all based around the humble pie.

But whoever falls short will miss out on their chance

to compete in next week's quarter-final.

Bakers, welcome back to another glorious sunny day,

and today we enter the world of pie.

And today, it's signature bake.

So, for this, you'll be required to produce a hearty family pie

with either a rough-puff or a flaky pastry topping.

OK, you've got eagle eyes and silver fox all over this one,

so, on your marks, get set, bake.

This complex challenge demands the bakers combine making both the pastry

and the filling, and then baking them together.

Timing and flavouring are crucial

and they have just two and a half hours to perfect their signature pie.

Main problems they'll face with the pie is not getting the pastry quite right.

It should have risen beautifully, be finished off well, a nice crust.

And once we cut into the pie, the proportion of the filling

and sauce should complement each other and, of course,

it should be well seasoned.

Both rough-puff and flaky are the best pastries to use when making pies,

as the light crispy texture contrasts with the dense meat, fish or vegetable fillings.

I'm making flaky pastry at the moment.

It doesn't rise as much as puff pastry

but it's really nice on pies, so I'm just hoping that they like it.

Flaky pastry is made by blending flour,

salt and butter to make dough

to which small pieces of butter are then added

before the rolling, folding and resting.

- One, two, three...
- You're busy.
- Morning, Yasmin.

You're counting peppercorns. This is precision stuff.

I need to get them all out. I don't want anyone biting on a peppercorn.

- True.
- What are you making for us, then?
- I'm making a fish pie.

Yasmin is hoping for success with her family fish pie.

And for an added touch of luxury, she's adding quail's eggs.

- Now, the pastry. You're doing...
- Flaky pastry.

- You're doing it the way my mum makes it.
- Oh, really?
- By grating.

Exactly, that's how my mother did it.

I put it in the freezer this morning so it was nice and hard,

and she used to buy special butter that was just for grating, I seem to remember.

To be honest with you, I'm a puff pastry man myself...

- Not a euphemism.
- I enjoy making puff pastry, so I'm fascinated.

I opted out of puff pastry as I was scared of it not rising.

But he is a professional.

We're all amateurs, which is the difference.

We choose a pastry that's easy to handle and gets good results.

I wouldn't say that flaky was easy, though.

- Right, Holly, it's a hive of industry here.
- Yes, it is.

Tell us about your pie.

It's a three cheese, caramelised onion and potato pie with a flaky pastry lid.

Very nice.

Holly's the only one making a vegetarian pie.

Stilton, potato and caramelised onions are flavoured

with extra Gruyere and strong Cheddar.

My husband is one of those men, if there's not meat in a meal,

he hunts for it, so whenever a vegetarian family come over

I'm not going to make two meals. I have make something that's tasty enough for him to say,

"It's OK that there's no meat." So...

So you have to fool him?

My cooking's just family cooking, you know?

I'm not pretending it's terribly refined or anything.

And that's the way it is.

Janet is making a chicken and bacon pie with chestnuts,

baked in a butter and milk roux.

Usually I make this at Christmas with the remains of the turkey,

but I couldn't bring myself to ask for turkey in May.

It seemed just completely wrong.

So...I'm doing a chicken version.

So, it sort of keeps the theme of Christmas

but in a different form.

Did you get that?

Mary-Anne's taking a novel approach to keeping her dough cool

and her flakes perfect.

What I'm going to do is to put everything into a freezer bag

and then use a rolling pin on the outside

to flatten the hard butter and lard into flakes,

so, rather than do it by consecutive rolling,

I'm going to make the flakes and then mix, add the liquid.

Just two tablespoons of water and one of vinegar

to bring it together into a pastry.

Since the competition began,

Mary-Anne's experimental approach has resulted in some unusual recipes.

And her signature dish of chicken and bacon with flaky pastry

is no exception.

The pastry I'm doing is flaky pastry,

but it's not really the traditional method of making it.

I've chopped up the butter and the fat,

and I've put them in the freezer to harden them up,

and then I've got a mixture of flour, salt,

and a little bit of cream cheese.

Mary-Anne has also added vinegar to her pastry,

which, when combined with fat, inhibits strands of gluten forming -

in theory, keeping it flaky.

Mary-Anne, she was battering something in a plastic bag.

It's rather a mucked-about recipe. We'll see the result, but what a mess.

You know, that bag, and in and out of it. And also, the things that are in it, I mean,

baking powder and vinegar is quite unnecessary. We shall see.

They look like they mean business today.

Mary is dressed as a cowgirl. I think that means business.

She's got her hand in the wrong pocket, though. Should be at the front.

While four of the bakers have chosen to make flaky pastry,

the remaining bakers, Rob, Jo, and Jason, are all making rough-puff.

At the moment, I'm just grating frozen butter.

That'll be mixed into the flour, creating a buttery streak

so when it cooks, those will puff up to make it puff.

Rough-puff is harder to make as it requires definition in its layers

in place of the irregularity of flaky pastry, where imperfections are part of the effect.

- Hello, Rob.
- Hi.
- So, you're at the pastry making stage.
- Yes.

- It's quite wet at this stage.
- It is wet at this stage.

Has there been a misunderstanding with the ingredients?

No, because I never actually measure the water, I just put it in.

- That is too wet, though.
- Yes.
- But you can just add a bit more fat.

In his head, I can just hear, "Overworked, overworked, overworked."

Lancashire-born Rob sees pie making as one of his specialities,

and has chosen to make a traditional chicken and mushroom pie

with clove studded onion.

But, in previous weeks, timing has not been Rob's strong point.

I have no idea how long it usually takes me

cos usually, I'm doing it while other people are around

having a drink, so I have no idea.

I think we've got plenty of time, so I'm not worried about this at all.

Once the butter's been combined, the rough-puff dough must be rolled,

folded, turned and rested three times

and must be kept cool so that the butter doesn't melt before baking.

- Have you tested this out on the family?
- Yes.

The kids aren't lovers of pastry, but they all tried the middle.

Dylan loves salmon, and Billy really liked it. Yeah, they did.

- They gave you the thumbs up?
- Yep.

Jo's salmon and asparagus pie is flavoured with a delicate white wine shallot and cream sauce.

Mary and Paul are not expecting the pies to have a pastry base.

However, they do want to see the crust and filling baked together.

- Hello, Jo.
- 'And Jo's made a controversial decision.'

I'm actually doing a deconstructed pie.

I'm doing my pie topped separately

on a baking sheet in the oven and I'm going to put it on afterwards

because with the salmon, it only needs such a light cooking

and I was a bit concerned about getting all the seasoning

and everything right when it was in the oven,

and I didn't want to overcook it, so I decided to cook my pie top separately.

I think it's rather sad

not to make pastry flavoured by the fish. We'll see.

I'm going to stick with my pastry lid separately

because I practised this at home, and maybe if I'd known Mary wasn't that keen before today,

I would have practised it otherwise, but I have to stick with it,

otherwise it could just all go really wrong.

- What pastry are you using today, Jason?
- I'm making rough-puff pastry.

- Can I have a look at your pastry?
- I've grated the butter in.
- You've just mixed it?

- Yeah.
- So you've grated the butter in. OK.

Jason's filling of a spicy Caribbean brown down chicken

may have traditional routes, but it's never been seen in a pie until now.

- Brown down, can you explain?
- Yeah. The brown down is how it's cooked,

so before you cook any of the filling, you heat oil in a pan

with a bit of sugar so it caramelises and adds a nice sweetness.

- I've got quite a few spices.
- Is it like a Cajun style? Or Bajun style?
- Yeah, yeah.

As their pastry chills,

most bakers have began to tackle what's inside their signature pies.

Bold flavours are essential.

But the judges will also be looking for combinations that complement the rich, buttery pastry.

Ladies and gents,

time flies when you're baking pies.

You've got one hour left on the clock.

Oh, look. OK, using the spoon.

- I don't like this term.
- What is it?

Knocking up the edges.

It makes it sound like you've done something horrible to the pie.

- Did that go according to plan?
- Yes.

Sealing is critical.

If the filling bursts through the pastry, the pie's appearance will be ruined.

Egg wash ensures a golden crust when baked.

- Have you egg washed that enough?
- I hope so.
- OK.
- I can't go on dipping and dabbing.

No, you're absolutely right. Get it in there.

I don't know why I'm watching it.

It's not going to make it any better, is it?

That's 10 minutes on the pie clock.

Accurate oven time for pies is critical.

While the filling must be perfectly cooked, the pastry must be well risen

and only just golden brown.

- I thought you had yours out?
- I did, and then I shoved it back in again.

- Just to be on the safe side?
- Yes.

That's just two minutes on the pies.

It's a really good fit, thankfully.

SHE BREATHES A SIGH OF RELIEF

OK, the time for pie is nigh.

So bring your pies to the end of your benches

and prepare for judging.

It's judgement time for the signature bake.

- Hello, Rob.
- You all right?

Visually, it's got a nice colour.

Overall, it's a nice bake, but the pastry's shrunk

so that means it needed a bit more resting. If it isn't rested and chilled,

that's what happens. It slips in.

Your chicken is slightly overcooked.

You've chosen to cook your pastry separately.

Yes, I didn't want to overcook my salmon.

I don't know whether you've convinced me.

The sauce has split. The flavour of the salmon's good.

It's seasoned well.

My only cause for concern is how thick that is. There hasn't been much of a build up of layers.

- It doesn't look part of the pie.
- No, it does look a separate thing.

- You've got a nice colour to the top.
- A little underdone under the pastry.

Now, doesn't that look good inside?

- You've got some lovely colour in there.
- Your pastry's too thin.

There's not much rise in there. It's rubbery.

It's a lovely flavour. You've got the seasoning right, which is good.

That really does look a lovely, family pie.

It's got a wonderful shine on the top. It's well-risen.

- There's so much filling in there.
- That smells really nice.

I like the colours.

Got some nice layers going on.

That taste is lovely.

You've nailed that taste.

I can't fault it, really.

- You've no idea how much that's made my day.
- She's gone red.

This needs more bake to get the colour.

This is very, very light. It's anaemic.

The chicken is overcooked.

The vegetables are very interesting, the spices are fun.

- It's really quite different.
- The pastry hasn't got much of a rise.

You need to build up more layers in there, because it's quite thin.

The flavour of that, though, is fantastic.

- That's a nice finish on the top, there, Mary-Anne.
- It looks great.

I like the decoration you put on it. The colour's good.

Now, that's a good consistency.

It seems to me a very different, complicated pastry.

- You've got too much vinegar in there, you know.
- Yeah?

I can taste it. It's not nice.

The interior is beautiful, well cooked, perfect.

- But that is a... It's a shame.
- OK.

You haven't got much of a flake. You've got a little bit, see there?

Yes, yes. I think I could have done it thicker, to be honest.

It needed to be thicker and maybe more folds which would have created more of a laminate.

- It's very crispy.
- The chicken is cooked perfectly.
- Good.

The leeks come through.

The seasoning is right and there's pepper there. For me, it's right.

I think that's good.

Holly is the only baker to escape the judging unscathed.

I'm a little bit in shock. I feel a bit sick, actually.

I'm really pleased. Really pleased.

The others will have to up their game to secure their future in the bake off.

The pastry was underdone. I was trying to not overdo the chicken but the chicken was overdone as well.

I would like to have done better, but what's done is done.

It wasn't all negative, so I'm pleased about that.

I feel quite annoyed with myself, really,

that having made plenty of pastry,

I could have made it quite a lot thicker.

The end result would, no doubt, have been better.

But, you know, we have to just move onto the next thing

and hope to do slightly better.

We ate 150m worth of pork pies in the UK last year. I say "we"...

But a staggering one third of those were made in a small Leicestershire town.

Melton Mowbray.

The story of pork pies begins in the early 18th century.

In about the 1720s, there were lots of smallholdings

and farms making cheese, and the by-product is whey.

Whey's very rich in protein, and, of course, it's free.

The smallholders fed it to their pigs. The area became famous for pork.

In the summer, the smallholders would fatten the pigs

and in the winter, when there was less feed, they were slaughtered.

Portions of the meats, the shoulder and the belly, were turned into pork pies,

which is a way of preserving the meat.

Original pork pies were pretty crude,

and were given to the farm labourers who would take them to the field.

At lunchtime, they would break them open and eat the meat inside.

You'd throw away the pastry because the pastry was black, hard, inedible.

Pork pies were being made across the UK.

But in the 1830s, Melton Mowbray's took on star status.

At this time, the region was famous for hunting.

And every winter, the country's most influential lords and ladies

- flocked there for their sport, and to sample the local food.
- During the hunting season,

the labourers would work as grooms looking after the horses.

The aristocracy took a glimpse at these pies and wanted to try them.

They liked the meat, but didn't like this awful pastry coating and wanted a posher version.

At the time, hot water pastry was being developed.

A mix of boiling pork fat and flour which gave crumbly texture and rich flavour. Perfect for pork pies.

The aristocracy loved this. It was a robust meal that they would pack in their saddlebags

and eat literally on the hoof. When the hunt season was over in the spring, the aristocracy

would return to London and tell all their friends about these amazing pies.

Everybody wanted a slice of them.

The bakers in Melton Mowbray would make them out of season, and they would send them

to London on the Royal Mail Stagecoach, one of the first examples of food by mail order.

Almost 300 years later, the Melton Mowbray unique pie

was awarded protected geographical status,

giving the humble pork pie the same kudos as Champagne and Parma ham.

To use the Melton Mowbray name today,

there are some strict rules you must stick to.

Number one is the pork. It must be fresh, British and uncured.

Number two, they're baked with no support,

so there's no tin or hoop to hold them up.

They will naturally sag and you end up with this classic bow-sided, pot-bellied shape.

And number three is that they must be baked

within this designated geographical area around Melton Mowbray.

This is our heartland, and if anyone's going to be passionate and protective of them,

then it's going to be the local community.

To make a Melton Mowbray pork pie takes four days.

Day one, you make the pastry, day two, you make the pie,

day three, you bake it and day four, it's ready to sell and eat,

and that can't be rushed, it's almost reverent,

and that's why we're so passionate about it.

Bakers, no time to rest on the rough-puff laurels.

Now comes the dreaded technical challenge.

As always with the technical challenge, Mary and Paul, it's judged blind,

- so we're going to ask you to leave the tent.
- Goodbye.

OK, bakers, for the technical challenge,

we're going to ask you to make a batch of six miniature pork pies.

Now, cos the fillings need time to set,

you're making it today and it'll be resting overnight,

so the judging will actually take place tomorrow.

- You've got two and a half hours. We wish you all the very best of luck. On your marks, get set...
- Bake.

Each baker has been given exactly the same recipe and ingredients,

and must produce six perfect miniature pork pies.

As always in the technical bake, the detail of the recipe is missing,

and it's up to the bakers to fill in the gaps using their skill and knowledge.

Paul has set the bakers his own recipe, where the centre contains a difficult-to-achieve surprise.

I try and go straight down the middle so I can get that egg...

- There you go. And you can see...
- That looks beautiful.

You've got the gelatine all around, squared off at the bottom,

- jelly's all the way down to the bottom. You can see it's set.
- And right to the top.

And up to the top. And nicely filled with small pieces of meat.

And again, perfectly in the middle is the quail's egg.

It looks absolutely beautiful.

- Cheers, Mary.
- Cheers.

Pork pies use hot water crust,

an infamously complicated pastry variation that few bakers,

including professionals, are brave enough to use.

I feel a bit out of my depth.

Never made hot crust, whatever it is, before.

Hot water crust pastry is made by heating lard and butter in a pan with water,

being careful not to let the mixture boil

before adding it to flour and salt and mixing into a smooth, shiny dough.

What does it say? Stirring till it comes together...

Work into a ball.

Looks like a ball already.

I'm not going to risk using it all.

That could be my downfall.

The shiny dough must be cool enough to work, but must be moulded while still warm.

It's quite odd working with something that's quite so warm,

since normally with pastry, it's supposed to be cold, cold, cold.

The pastry has to be rolled thin,

but if it cools too much, it becomes flaky, dry and impossible to mould.

I don't get how this pastry works at all.

It's rock hard, it's quite odd stuff.

I used all my strong flour instead of quarter and a half.

Talk about cack-handed! But I can't swap, because I've got floury hands!

I'm worried about time now. I'm going to have to work really fast.

This is pastry 2.0, cos the first one I thought was too wet.

I'm running the risk because... Whoops.

The filling is every bit as difficult.

Pork loin, onion, bacon and parsley must be finely chopped so that it can be tightly packed,

otherwise the egg simply won't be held in the correct position.

I'm so going to cut my fingers today. I'm actually shaking now.

Just being judged on anything is quite nerve-wracking.

Although she's never used hot water crust before,

Yasmin regularly makes pork pies for her children to take to school with them.

I've never seen pork so minced as that. That is a well and truly minced pork, by hand.

I actually chewed it!

Yes, regurgitate your pork, finely.

I just don't want them saying...cos everything says "finely chopped."

- They mean that.
- I don't want to lose out on... "It's nice, but lumpy."

Taking the filling out.

I didn't season it at all,

so definitely not going to get away with that. Unseasoned pork...

OK, let's try this again.

I've never made pork pies.

I've never even boiled a quail's egg before!

I'm not very grand.

I'm not eating like Henry VIII, quail's eggs and lark's tongues.

Working with quail's eggs is a first for many of the bakers.

They need to be boiled only just long enough

so they're firm and easy to peel.

Are you ready? Jump up if you are.

But boil them too long, and once in the pie and in the oven, they'll overcook and go hard.

How long do you boil a quail's egg for, do you know?

No-one seems to know. I don't know.

All I know is under two and a half minutes, cos this is overdone!

- Is it?
- Yeah.

I've never boiled an egg before.

- What, just a normal egg or just a quail's egg?
- Normal egg.

- You've never boiled a normal egg before?
- I don't eat boiled egg.

You can make a macaroon but you can't boil an egg?

No.

Once the egg is packed within the filling, the lids are placed on the pies

with a small hole in each to allow steam to escape

and for the jelly to be poured in after baking.

Then they're well-sealed and crimped to stop the filling seeping out.

The pies are egg-washed and put in the oven to bake for 40 minutes.

Bakers, you have got ten minutes of pie fun to go.

Ooh.

Very interesting looking.

I'm going to leave them in there.

They don't look cooked to me.

When the pies are baked, the bakers make the jelly,

which is done by dissolving a leaf of gelatine in hot water

and adding chicken stock for flavour.

Gelatine, where's that? Have I thrown it away?

The warm liquid jelly is then poured in through the steam hole

and will be left overnight to set.

The jelly holds the meat and egg in place.

I have a cunning plan.

OK, that's it, time's up,

and remember these aren't going to be judged until tomorrow,

so you can stand easy, they'll sit in the fridge overnight,

and then, judgment day.

That was hard. I didn't know how much to work that pastry,

I didn't know how the mixture reacted.

It was the unknown that was quite hard.

I think I did a good job of messing it up.

Mine do not look very pork-pie-like.

They exploded a bit and the gelatine was a weird colour.

It's not my finest work, I have to say.

It's not much fun waiting for the judges' overnight verdict.

You over-think. I'll be sitting going, maybe they're too light, I should have cooked them for longer.

It's not good, waiting, at all, it's just more suffering.

The jellies have set, the pies have rested,

and the moment of truth has arrived.

Judging blind, Mary and Paul haven't seen the baking process,

and have no idea which pies belongs to which baker.

The colour's good, the egg is situated bang in the middle.

- The meat's been cooked well. But the pastry's too thick.
- Much too thick.

There's not much jelly in there at all. Hardly any, is there?

- Nice flavour.
- It's got a nice flavour.

This has got hardly any gelatine in there as well.

- And this one is slightly under-baked with the pastry.
- Yeah. Yeah.

Good taste.

I like the look of this one. There's been some form of display.

They tried to create a pattern on the outside, which looks nice, and it's got a good colour on it.

- It's a good bake.
- Pastry is a bit thick, isn't it?
- Hm.

The meat is nicely chopped up in here, small.

Nice flavour. The bake on this needs a bit more of a colour.

There's no attempt of crimping round the outside.

The egg's in the middle, the pastry's thinner.

But it's on the thick side.

But the pieces on the lid, especially, very thick.

It's not chopped very small, is it, the meat?

- It's a little bland.
- Hm.

I must say, I like that appearance.

It looks home-made and inviting, and it's lovely thin pastry.

Good flavour.

- I like that.
- So do I.

The pastry on this, it needed more of a bake,

it's very, very soft.

There's not enough meat in there, so it hasn't filled the lid, hasn't touched the top.

- The meat is nice and small.
- And so is the pastry thin.

Little bit bland for me. Little bit more seasoning.

The appearance is a bit irregular.

And again, it's to do with the meat spewing out the top.

It's a lovely thin crust.

That's one of the things that's so difficult to get right.

I'm sure you've found. It's very tasty.

Paul and Mary must now rank the bakes from the worst to the best.

OK, we've made our decisions,

and the person in last place, Mary.

This one here.

The pastry is far too thick. There's not enough filling there and the pieces are far too big.

It needed longer baking as well.

And in sixth place is this one.

- That's me.
- Jo.

It was uncooked in places. I didn't see much gelatine in there as well.

It was quite dry.

And this one. The pastry has come away from the filling

and there's no sign of any jelly in there,

and the bake wasn't so good either.

With Holly fourth and Rob third, the battle for top place in the technical challenge

is between Janet and Mary-Anne.

So, down to the last two. Second place is this one.

They're pretty good, Mary-Anne. I like the way you've done it.

The pastry's a little bit thick at the bottom, but good pie.

And if you're very clever, you've worked out who's number one.

Pastry was just the right thickness.

We've got a little bit of gelatine in there too,

- and the meat was beautifully flavoured and well cut up. Well done.
- I'm very grateful!

Well done!

To be honest, I'm absolutely amazed because I've never made a pork pie

and never intended to.

So this doing well today is like a little gold star, so that's nice.

So I'm happy. Yes, I'm happy.

Fifth out of seven isn't the best ranking.

It's not a safe place to be.

I know it's not the bottom, but when there are so few people left now,

nowhere's particularly safe to be unless you've just come out first.

I was pretty much expecting to be number seven

from the comments they gave, so it's quite a sad feeling.

It's not good to feel I'm doing so bad.

I feel like I'm letting the judges down, cos I've done well in the past.

I want to win the competition. I don't know if I've got what it takes.

Sometimes I believe I have, sometimes I don't.

It's the final challenge.

There's one last opportunity for the bakers to secure their future in the competition.

I think Jason's in serious trouble.

If his showstopper is in the bottom half, he's in serious trouble.

- Jo's pie.
- This was the separate lid.
- The lid didn't work.

I haven't forgiven her for that. It's not a pie.

- You've got to bring in Yasmin, as well.
- Really?
- Yeah.

- The fish pie yesterday?
- Yeah.
- The crust, you said, wasn't...
- It wasn't a great lamination.

The layers weren't there.

- Today, she came third from bottom.
- So this is going to be a very interesting showstopper.

We're going to be watching three people closely.

It's very tight. It is very tight.

Bakers, however stunning those pies were this morning,

they were merely the warm-up act to the main event,

the showstopper challenge.

And for the first time we're asking you to bake a sweet pie.

Mary and Paul are looking for your best meringue pie

that you can possibly come up with.

They're looking for people today who are going to take their baking to another level.

Very best of luck.

- On your marks, get set...
- Bake!

Creating a perfect meringue pie requires accuracy and precision in three demanding baking disciplines.

Their pastry base must be crisp.

Their freshly made custard or fruit filling must be set.

And their meringue topping has to be firm on the outside, but with a soft and chewy centre.

The pies must be ready in just three and a half hours.

This week's showstopper, it should be bold, magnificent, and it should taste superb.

If they're going to use plums or peaches, or lemons or limes,

the key thing is to get that flavour coming through into the filling.

Probably made it about ten times, so practised, but maybe not enough.

Holly aims to impress

by perfecting a base of chocolate shortcrust pastry,

filling it with fresh lime curd and topping it with an Italian meringue.

Now tell us about this pastry.

It's a nightmare to work with!

- Why, Holly, why?
- It's all butter.

It uses egg yolks to bind it.

- Very difficult.
- What are you doing with that little wodge of pastry?

This is because otherwise my fingernails go into it,

- so I've been pushing.
- With the pastry?
- So I don't go through.

Do you know, Holly, that is a really good tip that everybody should take on board.

I have chosen to make what I've called the Midnight Meringue.

So it's a dark chocolate pastry and a dark meringue

that's either going to be coffee or brown sugar.

I read that brown sugar meringue tastes nice,

and I've never made it so I thought, why not take the British Bake Off

to have a go at making brown sugar meringue?

Mary-Anne's unique pie will have a rich mocha filling

and either a brown sugar or coffee meringue.

She can't decide.

I'm going to mix up both batches of meringue, taste them, see which I like the best,

and then the winner gets to go on top.

She's the one that's original. She's got an interesting crust, and she hasn't even rolled it out.

She got it to the sort of crumb stage, and then worked it into the side, and that certainly works.

- And she's good with the old flavours, Mary-Anne.
- Yes, she is.

I'm under pressure because I have not performed well this week, such a crying shame.

I guess pies aren't my thing,

I think it's something I've just discovered.

So...

Jason's future in the bake off

could rest on a pie with a fresh plum filling

and pastry infused with ground ginger, cinnamon and orange zest.

One of the things which you're particularly strong on

is your combination of flavours,

but you must get technically the bake right. That's the key thing.

As the competition goes on, there's so many...

The things they're picking up on are so tiny, you cannot put your guard down on anything, really.

Rob has to stay focused to pull off his showstopper.

It's filled with fresh rhubarb poached in sugar, star anise and vanilla.

Now, it's all about timings on this one. You're notorious for pushing that right to the limit.

Are you comfortable about getting it done in that time?

Yeah. That's one of the things I've been working on the past few weeks, cos I know I was a bit rubbish.

He's getting better.

You have to speed up into the sense where you don't lose control.

That's the secret. You've got to speed things up.

To keep their pastry cases crisp, the bakers are blind baking,

using baking beans to maintain the shape of their pastry.

These days you might enjoy a lovely sweet meringue pie for dessert,

but in the Middle Ages, they had medicinal purposes too,

which led to some pretty weird pies.

I've come to the British home of medieval folklore, Glastonbury, to find out more.

What were the basic principles of medicine in medieval times?

Medicine was based on ancient Greek ideas,

and these go back to Hippocrates and Galen.

Their theories were based on something called the four humours.

The four humours were bodily fluids.

They were blood, bile, yellow bile and black bile, and phlegm.

Balancing the four humours was essential

in maintaining a person's health, and food played an important role.

What you ate was said to be linked to each of the humours,

and categorised as either hot, cold, wet or dry.

It was believed that if you were sick,

you could achieve good health by eating foods

that opposed your symptoms and rebalanced your humours.

If you've got an excess of a specific humour, you need to get that taken out of your body.

If you don't have enough of a humour, you've got to have it put into your body.

So say I've got a fever,

what might have been good for me to eat in medieval times?

Some fish. Fish is really good, cold and wet.

- To counteract the hot and dry.
- That's right.

It sounds quite sensible, in a way.

Well, every period of time has to have its own system of explaining health and illness,

and this was just part of the medieval system of health beliefs and practices.

In medieval kitchens across England,

cooks attempted to create meals that perfectly balanced the humours.

As health was prioritised over taste,

this often led to the combination of all four elements in one single dish.

The key thoughts behind the medieval desire for health was balance,

so from the cook's point of view you're looking for things

that are hot, dry, cold and wet.

So you're aiming to create the perfectly balanced pie?

I'm looking to create a balanced pie, yes, that's not going to cause ill health in anybody.

To create the perfect pie, pigeons, which were considered light and airy

and rabbits, which were earthy, were poached to provide the cold and dry elements.

Dates were stoned and filled with sugar and ginger

to give the hot and dry ingredient.

So Caroline, you've got the basics of the pie there.

What do we move on to next?

We move on to the custard, which is going to be enriched with bone-marrow.

Right, that's a worry.

That's a slight worry to me,

the idea of a bone marrow in a custard.

When I think of custard, I think bright yellow and sweet.

It's not going to be sweet.

The custard itself is the only liquid in here, so it's wet.

Bone-marrow, dry definitely.

Dry, cold, cold and dry.

Words fail me.

All I know is, I'm going to be eating that.

Now, I have to say, this is a pie that's supposed to be good for health in medieval times.

It doesn't look massively healthy to my modern eyes.

Well, they didn't know about fat, calories, minerals, vitamins.

What they were interested in, was balance of the humours.

I'm feeling in quite good health now.

Whether I will be after eating the pie, we'll see. Here we go.

So what do you think of the pie?

I'm getting savoury at the forefront and I'm getting sweet at the back.

In a mad way, it does taste strangely medicinal.

With their cases baking,

the bakers must use this time to begin preparing their fillings.

Oh, my lord.

You have to be King Arthur to get the knife out of this.

While she's performed well in the first two challengers,

Janet is taking a risk with an unconventional rhubarb, orange and ginger filling.

So this must be precision rhubarb pie coming out. Very unusual to me.

I'm going to do it in the oven, so it doesn't break down.

I want to stand them up like terracotta warriors.

- Just round the edge?
- The whole thing.
- The whole thing?
- Hopefully.

It's going to take a bit of time to get them all there, but I hope it works.

- I'm sure it will.
- I hope it works.

- It's unique, I've never seen that before.
- Oh, really? Oh, OK.

I've never ever made a meringue this size before.

It will be a bit of a challenge.

Jo's filling features fresh apple puree, whole raspberries and egg yolk,

to create a luxurious fresh fruit custard.

I want to make sure it's nice and smooth.

I don't want to leave anything to chance today.

I'm just taking my time

and giving it much more attention than I ever have at home, to be absolutely honest.

I want it to be perfect.

My pie is going to be a peach and raspberry pie, with peach puree in the bottom

and a raspberry ripple going through it.

The combination between the sweet and slight bitterness coming from that raspberry,

should be good.

It's all about balancing those flavours

and keeping that, for me, separate, because it will turn into a bit of a mush.

This is a better padding.

The bakers face a dilemma with meringue.

They have a choice between preparing the classic French style,

or the notoriously complicated Italian meringue.

Both methods involve separating eggs and whipping the whites until they form soft peaks.

Oh, no, why has that yolk gone in there?

Even a speck of fat in the whites, such as a drop of egg yolk,

will stop the proteins trapping air during the whipping process,

resulting in a flat, watery meringue.

A bit too much meringue in there, but it's OK.

Just a little bit of egg yolk got in the egg white,

but I think I've scooped it all out. I hope so.

Those making French meringues must whip their whites to the soft peak stage

before adding caster sugar and continuing to whip until the mixture forms stiff peaks.

This is then piped or spooned on top of the filling before baking.

I'm getting a bit of raspberry ripple in the meringue on the top.

A nice bright colour to finish it off.

Holly and Mary-Anne have risked preparing Italian meringue

which uses boiling sugar syrup to cook the egg whites instead of baking.

The syrup is made by melting sugar into water over heat.

Once the syrup's reached 115 degrees centigrade,

it must be poured into the egg whites and whipped until the mixture cools.

Mary-Anne's made life twice as hard for herself.

- Mary-Anne, I hear you're caught in the horn of a dilemma.
- I am.

I'm undecided with which meringue to put on.

- What meringues have you got?
- We've got brown sugar meringue here

and here we've got the coffee meringue.

- Do you trust my taste buds to give you an opinion?
- Er, yes.

That's fun fair.

That's lovely. Oh, that's Bonfire Night.

I'll just stop this and you can try it.

It's still got to cool down a bit, so mind yourself.

- You don't make life easy for yourself, do you?
- No, no.

The thing about you, Mary-Anne, is you're a thinker.

- That's always going to hold you back in life.
- I know.

As Mary-Anne deliberates, it's time for the five bakers making French meringues

to pop them in the oven.

OK, 15 minutes left, everyone, just 15 minutes.

Oh, my gosh!

Wow! I was really pleased with mine until I saw yours.

Having opted for her brown sugar meringue,

Mary-Anne's finishing with just minutes to spare.

She's not the only one.

I don't know if it's done. I can't tell.

It's done at half an hour, leave it for an hour and a half and it goes more and more.

This is like surgery now.

Oh, no! My edge is falling off.

No, that doesn't look good, does it?

- Are you playing jigsaw?
- I can't believe it.
- The 'Janet' jigsaw puzzle.

- There's this wobble I like.
- Do you know what it is?

I think it's sitting on the filling.

It's like a turban, isn't it? A meringue turban.

Despite being warned by Paul to watch his timing, Rob's pushed it right to the wire.

Has it got to be out of the tin?

Arghh!

OK, the meringue challenge has reached a stiff peak. It's time to stop, time is up.

Oh, yes. Bam!

- The meringue looks great.
- Just... I can't do anything.
- No, soggy.

For one of these bakers, this will be the last time they face the judges.

Janet, would you like to bring your pie up?

It looks fantastic, I'm telling you now.

You've got a really nice colour round the edge, as well.

There's a little patched up hole here. I bet you find it.

You've got a decent bake underneath, which is quite surprising with the amount of liquid that's come out.

I could feel it was baked underneath.

Janet...

- That is delicious.
- The pastry is crisp and delicious.

I'm flabbergasted, that you've managed to bake the base with that much fluid on it.

That meringue is beautiful. Well done.

Mary-Anne.

It's dark, it's bold.

To me, it looks jolly original.

That's just what we want, to be able to get out the slice in one piece.

I think that is scrumptious. So original, so different.

Technically, that Italian meringue should've been firmer.

It's too creamy.

Haven't you put brown sugar in the top? In the Italian meringue? That's why it's not set.

When you use brown sugar in a meringue, you're never going to get it.

It's always a bit runny.

Your base is cooked well.

Yes, success with the base, lovely and short.

The filling is very sharp, very good.

I don't get too much chocolate because it's so thin on the base.

I think it's wasted.

For overall look, it looks attractive.

It would've been as good to use a sweet paste, a normal, conventional sweet paste.

It would've given it more stability.

Jason.

A bit of liquid coming out again.

The pastry underneath is soggy and not quite cooked enough.

The ratio of meringue to filling is rather too much.

I tell you what, the plum sauce, I can't taste anything. This is bland.

Plums essentially don't have that flavour to carry through.

- It's nice and soft in the middle.
- It's just like eating a meringue - I can't taste anything else.

Rob.

- It's happened again, hasn't it, Rob?
- Yeah.
- Showstopper, a big disaster.

Yeah, it's kind of fallen apart.

It's just a little disappointing when we look into it.

I think you've got a nice meringue.

The rhubarb's not quite done enough as well. It's quite hard.

It all tastes very good, but it hasn't worked as a whole.

Yasmin.

Visually, I love the top, I love what you've done to that. I think it looks great.

The sides look underdone, for sure. You've got big areas on the side,

so I wonder what it's going to be like underneath.

- Nice to see the layers, isn't it?
- It is quite wet down at the bottom.

- Yeah.
- Actually, your structure is quite stable.

The pastry is raw underneath.

- Technically, the outside has let you down.
- Yeah.

And that's the baking bit.

Jo, last but not least.

Now, the arrival of your meringue has coincided

with the arrival of monsoon season.

The pastry looks well cooked.

However, there are lots of pieces missing.

- Oh!
- I just wanted to have a quick look at the base.

- It's actually baked underneath.
- Well baked underneath.

- It's nice and short as well, that, which is good.
- It's lovely pastry, isn't it?

The meringue melts, which is nice.

It just looks a bit messy. But overall the actual tastes are very good.

I don't think it was good.

Obviously, Paul made a point of saying that my pastry wasn't cooked enough, and that's the baking part.

I think I'm probably being considered for the chop this week.

I was really disappointed in that result.

I think there's only a certain amount of mess-ups that you can do before being kind of knocked off,

so I kind of know that my head's on the chopping block.

But the other chances went all right, so...

To me, I just feel kind of anxious.

Do I think I'm out, or is there a glimmer of hope that I might be in?

I'd definitely say there's a glimmer of hope.

Paul and Mary must now decide who should be this week's star baker

and who won't be coming back for this year's quarter-final.

Let's look at the positive end of the spectrum - star baker. Now, who are the contenders this week?

- Certainly Janet and Mary-Anne.
- She's had a very good weekend, hasn't she?

- She has.
- Fair to say that Jo has had a real rollercoaster of a weekend.

She's been bumbling through and I think this has lifted her out of the depths.

- Just saved her.
- Because of the flavour. Rob's come in with this and it's just a mess, it's unbaked.

And even I went round before and said to him,

"Listen, you've got to get your timings right."

Now, that, for me, brings him immediately straight into the danger zone.

- Because you gave him an official warning?
- He's been warned so many times about the same thing.

- Let's talk about Yasmin.
- It is underdone, slightly, on the side.

I thought it was stunning on the top, but the peach

was absolutely lost with the raspberries.

And her pork pie? She came... Fifth out of seven.

So is she still hovering around the red danger zone?

- She's still hovering. Yes, she is.
- So Jason didn't do have a brilliant day yesterday, did he?

You look at his pork pies, he was at the bottom. And then you look at the showstopper.

All you've got is aerated meringue with a taste of plums underneath.

And you've got no flavour in plums.

There is no flavour, intrinsically, in a plum.

It's gutting because he's got so much promise.

He was star baker, he shared it with Holly last week and he's had it the week before.

The bakers that we're looking to win are the consistent ones,

and they have to be consistently good at everything.

So in the drop zone we have Jason, Rob, Yasmin.

Will one go or will two?

THUNDER RUMBLES

- And the thunder breaks on cue.
- I think that was Mary.

LAUGHS

First of all, well done, you magnificent seven.

You have grafted so hard

and we've had the most fantastic pie bake off, so well done.

Let's start with a resounding positive.

Now, this week the judges were in total agreement

as to who should be our star baker.

And so this week's star baker is...

..Janet.

APPLAUSE

Well done.

Thank you.

Unfortunately, you know the drill,

we can't take all of you on to our next bake off.

So today we're going to be saying goodbye...

..to Jason...

..and to Rob.

- I'm so sorry, guys.
- We're sad to see you go.
- We are very sad to see you go.

- Bro'...
- Oh, guys, that is a gutter, it's a gutter.

Rob left today because it was one mistake too many.

And, in fact, it came to a point a few weeks ago

where I had to say something and say, "One more big mess-up like that and you're out."

And unfortunately we had it today.

Jason is 19, but he just didn't have the skills and the background to baking.

In my industry at the moment there's a lack of youth coming through.

It was lovely to see the passion they've got for baking.

Jason's just had a chat with me and said,

"I think I want to give up design and I want to go into baking."

And I said, "If that's what you want to do, do it."

It's just really proven to me that it's something that I'm not only good at, but I really enjoy.

When I'm doing it, I'm always smiling,

so hopefully I'll be able to fulfil that dream, and one day, you know,

look out for me, you'll see me doing something big.

I'm so gutted. I was really hoping to be in the final four.

It's meant a lot to me, being in this competition.

When it's something that you're really passionate about

it becomes really emotional.

Yeah, it's hard taking criticism.

I've learnt loads, so I'm only going to take positives from this.

I have dodged a bullet. Who'd have thought that?

I think I got in by the skin of my teeth there.

I'm very surprised that today I came out on top, and obviously

my family are going to be really, really pleased, and my friends, too.

- I got the star baker today.
- "Oh, well done!"

Isn't that just crazy?

Next time, it's an all-ladies quarter-final...

- What level of stress are we on, between one and ten?
- Nine-and-three-quarters.
- My Lord!

Where the remaining five face three challenging desserts:

- A baked cheesecake...
- I hope they like it.

To be honest, there's not a lot I can do about it now.

- Mary Berry's chocolate roulade...
- This doesn't even count as a roulade, it looks like a disaster.

No one has got a tight roll.

And finally, a showstopping French speciality.

Let's face it, I'm just showing off for the judges.

- Your creme patisserie is absolutely perfect.
- They are to die for.

- Who will be crowned Queen of Desserts?
- You've nailed that.

And who will be knocked out before the semi-final?

At this stage, it is really difficult to pick between them.

This is the week to watch.

The person that very sadly will be leaving us...

We've got five surviving as we search to find Britain's finest amateur baker.

Last week was pie week, with the bakers busier than Sweeney Todd on a Bank Holiday

and a tent piled high with slices of piggy perfection!

And this week they've got everything to bake for, because at stake - a place in the Bake Off semi-final.

Welcome to the Great British Bake Off.

Last week was round five of the bake off.

- What a mess.
- I can't fault it.
- Janet surprised the judges...

- That is delicious.
- And herself...

This is like surgery now.

Yasmin narrowly missed being sent home...

I got in by the skin of my teeth, I think.



And the young men failed to maintain baking brilliance.

We're going to be saying goodbye to Jason...

and to Rob.

This week, even higher standards of baking skills are expected.

What level of stress are we on? Give me a number between one and ten.

- Nine and three-quarters.
- Oh, my Lord.

The five remaining bakers will need to fight for their place in the semi-finals.

This doesn't even count as a roulade.

It looks like a disaster area.

I'm just showing off for the judges.

Your creme patisserie is absolutely perfect.

They are to die for.

We're on the home straight to find Britain's best amateur baker.

They're overworked and so are their sponges and they've got two days to nail desserts.



I've never nailed a dessert, because the flavour can be a tad metallic.

Are you nervous, excited?

Nervous! There are five people in that tent baking desserts for us.

Why would I be nervous? I was born for this.

This week, the bakers face their biggest challenge yet.

Tomorrow, one will be crowned star baker

and for one, the journey will end.

So, welcome to this all-lady Bake Off quarter final.

Now, cracking on straightaway with your signature bake,

and today we're asking you to bake, please, a lovely cheesecake.

Judges, Paul and Mary, are looking for a nice, firm, rich, creamy centre,

- with your choice of flavouring.
- And you've got 2 hours on the clock

to complete your signature bake.

- So, just remains for me to say on your marks, get set...
- Bake!

A baked cheesecake is considered trickier than a simple refrigerated version,

as it requires perfect execution in a number of complex steps.

There are many things that could go wrong with this bake.

The crust at the bottom could be all soft.

The cheesecake mixture itself could be too stiff, or not stiff enough.

If it's overbaked, it'll most likely crack.

If it's underbaked, when you cut out a portion, it'll all fall apart.

But most importantly of all, it should be wonderful to eat!

To begin, the bakers create a base.

This is traditionally made from crushed up shop-bought biscuits, like digestives or ginger nuts.

- Just think of someone you don't like.
- SHE CHUCKLES

Stupidly, I decided to make biscuits. It's just pushing myself that little bit more.

It might impress the judges that I've made the extra effort.

Yasmin is making amaretti biscuits,

which, after baking and cooling, she will crush to form the base of her amaretto cheesecake.

I think I do want to impress this week, because I feel as though until now

I've kind of gotten through because somebody else has done worse than me

rather than I have done really well. I want to get through on merit rather than by default, basically.

So, how are your, your husband and daughter feeling about your, your success?

Really pleased for me, but I think my daughter is missing...

- She's missing her mum.
- Yes. Yes, she...
- Does she understand where you've gone?

Yes, and I'm not sure she understands why I keep having to go back.

Mary-Anne is also trying something different.

Instead of using biscuits for her tutti-fruitti cheesecake base,

- she's making a shortcrust pastry.
- Hi, Mary-Anne.

- Hello!
- And your pastry base for this, what's in that one then?

Pastry has got some ground almonds in for a bit of crunch.

It's got some lemon zest in and it does come out quite biscuity.

- So you're going to bake that blind first?
- I wasn't going to,

but after the other flan that I did I think I will, just to make sure and then maybe put an egg wash.

That's a very good idea, because the, the topping will be fairly wet,

- and if you don't it will go in and be soggy.
- Yeah, so we don't want another soggy bottom.

We don't, we don't do those.

De-de-de-de-de! Get back.

I'm about to press my base into the tin,

but I'm aware now that I've used lots of time up because I've made the biscuits.

On top of her biscuit base, Janet is adding rhubarb...

It's nice to have something with a tang at the bottom.

..to make her ginger and rhubarb baked cheesecake.

- Is the rhubarb going into your mixture or is it in a layer?
- No. No, it's just a layer

on top of the ginger.

I was going to puree it and then I thought bad mistake, cos it could be too wet and flood out.

And I think the very clever thing is the way that she's doing a wheel effect,

- which when you cut it...
- Yes.
- ..you will get the rhubarb in a long strip, which is fine

- because it's very difficult to cut across a stick of rhubarb.
- Right.

The next step for the bakers is to make their flavoured cheese topping.

The texture of the mixture can vary.

Heavy ingredients can lead to a dense cheesecake topping.

Whilst a lighter mixture can be achieved by folding in whisked egg whites.

I'm making curd cheese to go into my cheesecake.

It's very simple.

You just heat milk to boiling and add lemon juice and almost instantly curds form.

You let it cool down a bit and drain the whey from the curds and cheese. There you go.

Let's face it, I'm just showing off for the judges, so... SHE LAUGHS

Because I can!

The cheesecake that I'm making is quite a quick cheesecake

and I wanted it to be able to chill it properly.

Jo is racing ahead with a simple classic rum and raisin cheesecake,

which only takes 15 minutes to prepare.

You're not hanging round, are you?

- No.
- Is this your last job then?
- Yep.
- Is that it!

And then it's just finished off with some sour cream ten minutes before

the end, just to give it that little finish on top.

Jo, put your feet up! What will you do for two hours?

- I wanted one that would chill, so I could get it chilled properly.
- So that you can chill too.

You'll be finished in about 20 minutes?

- Yeah.
- Good luck.
- Put your feet up. Have a little rum.
- Thanks, Jo.

- Yep.
- Yeah.
- Thanks, guys.
- Good luck.
- Thank you.

The last contestant in the quarter final is Holly.

She's hoping her festive cheesecake will be a hit with the judges.

This cheesecake is for Father Christmas.

It's what we leave out instead of mince pies,

- cos Father Christmas, when he comes to our house, prefers cheesecake.
- Does he?
- He does.

It has semolina and almonds, brandy, Christmas spices and tangerine and lemon as well.

This will be quite dense.

Yeah, at this stage it's very dense.

But it, it, it has a lightness, because I'm also going to fold in egg whites.

- Lucky Father Christmas! Yes.
- Look forward to trying it then.

- See you.
- Thanks very much, Holly.
- Thank you.

OK, Team Oestrogen, you've got one hour remaining! One hour remaining!

A perfect cheesecake is ready to come out of the oven when the centre slightly wobbles.

Baking time is paramount to its success.

Say your prayers. Pray it works.

Our bakers are fortunate enough to have an unlimited supply of eggs, butter, cream, cheese and fruit.

However, once upon a time, desserts needed an awful lot of imagination - several very strange ingredients.

As food supplies diminished during World War II

and creating traditional desserts became impossible, the bakers of Britain needed to become creative.

It was time to bake for victory.

During the war, making desserts was particularly difficult.

Housewives found that their pre-war recipe books were useless,

they might as well have chucked them in the bin,

because they would say things like, "Take six eggs, take half a pint of cream,"

you know, "take butter", all this sort of thing.

Couldn't take any of those things!

Favourite desserts were almost impossible

to make, like lemon meringue pies, spotted dick, roly poly pudding.

So, really housewives had to use an enormous amount of imagination and ingenuity to create a dessert at all!

Faced with a nation that had become dependent on a limited number of ingredients,

in 1940, the Ministry of Food began to communicate alternative recipes and new approaches to baking.

Britain had to become much more self-sufficient.

And so the Ministry of Food was very anxious to encourage people

to grow vegetables in their back gardens

and what you grew in your back garden started to find its way onto your dessert menu.

Sometimes this would mean soft fruit like raspberries

and gooseberries, but it also, of course, meant vegetables.

The Ministry of Food published recipes detailing how to make tasty desserts

using potatoes instead of flour and vegetables as sweeteners.

One government tip was to use liquid paraffin instead of lard.

This suggestion had rather unfortunate consequences, as paraffin acts as a laxative.

Vegetables appeared in numerous mock recipes as substitutes for scarce ingredients.

Parsnips replaced bananas, chocolate truffles were made from mashed potato, and one of the most famous

mock desserts in the kitchens of Britain was the mock apricot flan.

The apricot part of it is carrot,

flavoured with plum jam and almond flavour.

The pastry case, in this instance, will be made with mashed potato.

So, the idea would be that you would be encouraged to cook several things at once.

So, you would cook more potato than you'd need for your meal, and then make this with leftover potato.

Putting the cooked mashed potato in does make it quite a difficult pastry to work with.

It makes it quite soft and sticky.

Using boiled carrots and plum jam as a substitute for apricots

was a unique concept for the housewives of Britain.

Although this has the colour of apricots and the flavour, it doesn't entirely look like apricots.

Mock dishes didn't necessarily totally look like the things

that they were supposed to be, they just reminded you either the shape, the colour, the taste, the texture.

And if you hadn't eaten apricots for ten years, then you might be quite pleased to have something like this

put in front of you, because it would remind you of the apricots.

Just half an hour till I can eat five cheesecakes!

Sorry, that was my internal monologue there. Half an hour, please! Half an hour!

It's about the bake. It's about the time in the oven.

So they're all watching their oven every five minutes to make sure everything's OK.

- OK. Mary, would you agree with that?
- Yes. Overbaking is the main thought.

You've got to catch it at the right moment, and it goes on cooking a little once it's out of the oven.

- Overcooking means that it will open out in a crack.
- But it's tricky.

At the end of the day, this is the quarter finals now,

- and any screw-ups from anybody, they've gone.
- They're out.

I want to do my best and I don't want to make stupid mistakes.

I would hate to sort of

fail just because I haven't made the effort I could have made, you know?

Cos one thing I say to the kids at school, just always do your best, and everybody's best is different.

You know, you can't always be the best,

but you can always do your best and, and that's all I'm hoping to do, you know?

Sensitive to temperature, cracks can develop when

the outside of the cheesecake is exposed to more heat than the centre.

I cooked it in a water bath today so that it hopefully won't crack on the top.

As water can only reach 100 degrees Centigrade before turning to steam, the water bath regulates

the temperature evenly across the cheesecake and prevents the outside from overcooking.

- Chilling.
- You've already done it?
- Yes, I've done it.
- She's unbelievable.

- How does she do it, Janet?
- I've no idea.

She was sitting looking demure and elegant before I'd even crushed my silly biscuits, so.

- I've never looked elegant or demure in my life.
- Well, I beg to differ.

Excellent.

Yeah, I was going to take it out, but I'm thinking it's got a little bit too much jiggle now.

It's supposed to have a little bit of movement in the middle, but...

I'm going to put it back in.

Another five minutes and hope the pastry doesn't catch.

BEEPING

Famous last words!

Bakers, you've got 15 minutes left.

- Oh, 15?
- 15, Janet. 15.

(15.)

So, pray it doesn't all collapse in the middle.

Smells OK!

Smells reasonably Christmassy!

The question is to glaze or not to glaze. I've got some lemon jelly marmalade that I've warmed up.

I don't, I don't know.

It looks like nothing's happening, but I'm fizzing in here, you know,

with 101 things - should I do this? Then, don't mess with it. Well, maybe I should...

It looks good!

I'm happy. Whether anybody else will be happy is a whole other thing.

One minute to go!

One minute to go, everybody!

Ooh, a bit crumbly.

- Careful! Careful! Careful!
- I know. I don't know how to do it!

- Mel, come away.
- Sorry, Hel.
- Oh, God!

It's gone and cracked in the middle.

So annoying.

Get in.

Rrr! How annoying.

Bakers, your time is up.

The bakers have done all they can.

It's now down to the judges to decide which cheesecakes will reach their high expectations.

- We're hungry, you know?
- Mary-Anne.
- Hi, Mary-Anne.

I must say, I really, I really like the filling.

You've got something quite unusual.

I love the flavours that you've got on there.

Lovely brown pastry, pale golden underneath.

The overall appearance is a bit rough and ready, you know,

where it's joined at the bottom and the sides.

This is the same for a lot of your stuff. You're nearly there and then you lose it on these things.

- I thought I was doing well with this.
- Now, Mary-Anne, when you're baking blind...
- Mmm.

- ..you put it in half-baked, then you take the beans out.
- Mmm.

That is the time to get a knife and level it off all the way round

- and you wouldn't have this higgledy-piggledy side to it.
- Right.

It's got a very nice flavour and you've achieved

a good crust on the base.

- For me, it's overbaked, which has made it quite dry.
- Yes.

It's just a little bit thick.

- Claggy.
- Yeah.
- I think you put semolina. Was it semolina?
- Yeah.

You get the crunch from that, which has taken away the texture of a cheesecake

which should be quite smooth and glossy.

I think Father Christmas should like it with a good dollop of cream.

Your base wasn't quite packed enough.

- OK.
- Maybe a little bit more butter...

just to bind it, cos it's broken down to nothing.

It's absolutely delicious.

You've got a lovely bake. The flavour's good.

And it's so delicate. Actually, the rum and raisin is perfect,

cos you haven't overwhelmed the alcohol, cos it's so easily done.

- And I love the cream topping.
- Thanks, Mary.

Yes, you've got quite a thick crust on the bottom,

and there's a little bit of a problem with the baking, of getting it out, haven't you?

It's overbaked on the outside. It could do a tiny bit longer in the middle.

It tastes like a baked egg custard to me.

It's almost split. It's got that texture of scrambled egg.

Janet, I love you.

You've nailed that.

- Really?
- The flavour of that is absolutely beautiful.

It's as light as a feather.

- Could I be critical about the top?
- Yeah, you can.

I could, but I think it's down to the fact that there's just so much on there.

It's nothing to do with the bake. Ah!

It's like fairies skipping on the tongue. That is great.

- That is stunning. It's like a souffle.
- Thank you.
- How many would that serve?

Quite a lot, don't you think? 12?

I don't know. 12! Not in our house.

Two in mine. That's an intimate dinner, Mary, for me.

It looks stunning.

I just don't get it at all, you know?

Just can't tell you how amazed I am, cos I don't do things imagining

they're ever going to be any good.

So, it's a sort of complete fluke and like utter amazement.

I can't tell how I've done, because they liked some bits and didn't like other bits.

And it was the same for everybody, I think.

It's quite even, apart from Janet, who completely shone.

Janet's obviously safe, but the rest of us aren't particularly.

The signature bake is designed to show the bakers' individuality.

The next challenge is, by contrast, strictly controlled.

Time for the next bake, which is, of course, our favourite.

It's that old Technical Challenge.

Now, Mary and Paul, of course, will judge this blind.

- So, Mary, Paul, please leave the tent. Thanks very much.
- Good luck.

So, today's Technical Challenge is...

to make a chocolate roulade, OK?

So, we're asking for a nice, thin sponge, neatly filled, and neatly rolled.

This is a difficult challenge this one.

You've got one and a quarter hours before serving it up

to King Hollywood and Queen Berry of judging. Good luck.

- On your marks, get set...
- Bake!

For this challenge, the bakers have been given a simplified recipe.

They will rely on their own skill and baking knowledge to produce a winning roulade.

What makes a great chocolate roulade?

You've got to get a well-risen mixture.

It should have these sort of informal cracks on it and a tight roll.

I think the bakers may be in real trouble when it comes to the rolling.

Some of them haven't made it before and I think they'll be trying to sort of rush it.

That will be a problem for them and they'll end up with one that doesn't look quite as beautiful as that.

Have you ever made one of these before?

I was starting to think that it sounds like I don't bake at all,

cos every Technical Challenge, "I've never made one of these before."

- Have you made a roulade before?
- I have, back in the day at school.

It was my nemesis!

Unlike a normal chocolate sponge, this recipe contains no flour, fat or raising agents.

Instead, the rise is created by folding in whipped egg whites, which create a light and fluffy texture.

You can knock the air out of them.

They need to be really light and airy.

Just cutting it with a, a metal spoon rather than

a plastic one, because that takes a lot of air out the plastic one.

Well, that's what I've always been taught anyway.

Egg whites consist of strands of protein.

When whipped, they form a network that traps and holds air.

- So, you need to beat it on so it's not streaky?
- Make sure that the egg is incorporated

- and you don't get...
- Strips of white.
- ..big lumps of white, yes.

To produce an even sponge suitable for rolling, the bakers

need to make sure the chocolate mixture is level in the tin.

I don't want to take any of the air away by patting it too much.

Oh, go on, get in the corner. Stop being silly.

- I think I'm going to try gentle encouragement.
- A gentle waft.

Encouragement into the corners.

Unlike the depth of a standard cake, the thin base of a roulade requires less time to cook.

Overbaking and underbaking could prove fatal, making the roulade difficult to roll.

30 minutes to go, bakers!

Half an hour left of roulade-making fun.

I'm trying to get rid of the sort of wet look on the top, you know,

in case it's a bit that hasn't baked, you know?

And that looks OK, I think.

It's a little bit uneven, but that's the problem with fatless sponges.

I think they're quite hard to smooth over cos they don't have that fat to kind of even out as it, as it melts.

The recipe states the sponge should remain in the tin until it's cool.

The tin will help the sponge keep its shape and stop it drying out.

- Well, it's looking a bit moist.
- However, with time against them,

the bakers know that the hot metal will slow the cooling process down.

You can't roll cold cream into a warm sponge cos it will just get awfully messy.

If it were me I'd take it out now, but that's not what the recipe says, so...

I've got a, a sneaky feeling that if we leave it in the tin to get cold it might not be roll-up-able.

I'm thinking it needs to go in the freezer, to be honest.

- Mmm.
- Let me ask you a question...
- Lady Mary Berry. Yes.

- the answer of which may, may resolve the dilemma.
- Yes.

This is Mary Berry's recipe, more than likely.

Do you think you should change it?

I'm going to try and roll it up and let it cool and then unroll it to put the cream in.

Probably doing exactly the wrong thing, but we'll see.

Janet is confusing the roulade technique with that of a Swiss roll.

Ah! Oh, my giddy aunt.

Swiss roll sponge contains flour, making it more pliable when warm.

It's so hot! What sort of hands are you supposed to have?

A roulade sponge is delicate and needs to cool before rolling.

But I'm not sure. This is pure invention.

OK, just five minutes to roll out the roulade! Five minutes!

Once the sponges have cooled, it's time for the bakers to tackle the trickiest part of the process.

The secret of getting that lovely spiral is just about half an inch from the end,

you cut through the chocolate roulade,

you put a thick layer of cream on the top,

then you bend that over and break it.

So, you start the spiral and then lift the paper

and let it roll to the end and then you tip it on like that.

Can't go wrong.

There was a, a thing I remember reading centuries ago where you snip a little bit.

Just cutting a notch to help start the rolling.

This is the scary bit.

Ooh and it's cracking!

Oh, dear.

I need some Mary Berry advice, that's what I need!

That's absolutely dreadful.

OK, bakers, you've got one minute left.

There is a trick to this, but I don't think I've got the secret.

It doesn't look great, does it?

Do you think I could cover that with icing sugar? They won't notice, will they?

No. Oy vey!

Arh!

What a fool, what a fool, what a fool.

Needs a corset,

that's what it needs.

I think it looks all right.

It's about the untidiest, hideous-est roulade she'll ever have seen.

This doesn't even count as a roulade.

It looks like a disaster area.

OK, that's time up or, as we say in the roulade business, log out.

What? I'm only a messenger.

As with all the technical challenges, Mary and Paul are never present during the bake.

They are unaware of which baker is responsible for which of the five roulades that sit before them.

Well, all of them have this problem with rolling up.

No-one has got a tight roll.

I quite like the look of this one.

- It's quite tasty that one.
- Mmm, it's very good.

- It has broken up a lot.
- It's not bad. No.
- But they've tried to do a swirl.

The overall appearance of it looks quite nice, though.

This one looks a bit of a mess. It's cracked so much that the cream's oozing out on top.

- Flavour's good.
- Flavour's good.

I enjoy chocolate roulade.

Now this one looks nice. Slightly cracked.

- It's got a nice taste.
- Mmm.

- There's, there's a little bit of a bend there.
- Yes. This one's made quite a bit of effort

- to get a good roll.
- Yeah.

- Mmm, that's good, isn't it?
- That's nice, yeah.
- Mmm.

- The decoration on it looks quite nice. It's got a bit of a curl here.
- And just a few cracks.

But a good rise here.

Yeah.

This one's has a sort of fairly major crack across the top.

Just lines of sponge and cream.

They all taste very good. We can't be too critical of the flavour. They're very, very similar.

That's what you've got to understand, the judging will be made

on how it's been rolled up, cos the taste is all pretty much identical so it'll be purely based on that.

Mary and Paul will now rank the roulades, starting with the worst.

The person in fifth place is this one.

- Highs and lows, Janet.
- Unlucky.

It was sort of weird actually, because I rolled it up once as a practice run and it was fine.

That was a major mistake to roll it up first and re-roll it.

- Silly. Sorry.
- Number four is here.

Had a big crack round the middle.

But, of course, the flavour was lovely, it's just the rolling up.

And in third spot we've chosen this one.

A major cut across the top. Not as much rolling.

There's a little bit of a bend, but it has given way.

And number two is here.

- Me.
- The little sieved cocoa on the top made a nice finish.

And quite neatly rolled up, but not quite tight enough.

So, obviously

- the winner, Jo. Well, done.
- Well, done, Jo!

You've managed, you've managed to get a nice roll

and there's even an attempt to make a roll inside as well, so well done.

When they was getting to number three I was thinking, "I'll take third. that's OK."

Then it was not three. I was thinking, "Two. Two's better than three."

Then there was one and I was like, "Oh, my God, I'm first!" Fantastic!

I'm not best baker. I'm not worst, but in the middle is still dangerous,

because in the middle with five people is quite close to the bottom.

Just put so much pressure on tomorrow.

Wouldn't mind so much if it was something that I was really good at tomorrow, but it's not.

It's the last day of the quarter final.

Just one challenge remains before Paul and Mary decide which baker will be going home.

So, two challenges down, who do we think's looking in trouble?

I actually think Holly's in trouble, which is...

which is a bit of a shock.

But on the other hand, she's been right down and she can pull right up.

- Mary-Anne?
- Again, another one in the danger zone, wouldn't you say?

She's in the danger again. She's quite good at pulling up.

Yasmin. She had a sort of middling, middling couple of challenges.

- Yasmin, again, is in the danger...
- Not so good.
- There's a few of them down there!

But then you've gone from Janet...

Janet's gone from the top to the bottom. She has a poor one today,

she's straight in there as well.

It's Jo that really did the best over the first two challenges.

- She had a great day.
- For me, Jo's the only safe one.

Good morning, Famous Five.

Hope you're all doing well, feeling fresh.

This is, of course, Showstopper Challenge day, and really it's your

last chance to prove that you should have a place in the semi-final of the Great British Bake Off.

This challenge is to make a croquembouche-inspired bake

that's really going to impress Paul and Mary.

You've got five hours to complete this Showstopper Challenge, so all that remains to say...

- OK, fabulous fembots, on your marks...
- Get set...
- Bake!

Traditionally served at French weddings, a croquembouche, literally translated as

"crunch in the mouth", is a spectacular tower of choux pastry buns

held together with hardened caramel.

This particular challenge is fantastic.

You're dealing in lots and lots of profiteroles that all have to be

exact colour, exact shape, and, finally, exact flavour inside.

The assembly is going to be extremely difficult and then the final decoration.

It's a really difficult challenge and I wish them well and I can't wait for the results.

- A few months ago if somebody said to me, "Can you just, just whip up...
- Knock up.
- "..108 choux buns."

I'd have gone, "You're off your rocker."

- Tell me about your culinary disasters this week.
- Oh, collapsing piles of profiteroles and...

- A flat choux.
- Yeah.

More like a pump.

For the profiteroles, the bakers need to make choux pastry.

First, butter is melted into a large amount of water...

I wish this would hurry up and boil.

Then flour is stirred in until a firm paste is formed.

This will be my fourth time I've made this now, so I feel like I've practiced quite a lot.

Apparently, the one that I made on Sunday is still standing in the fridge, half of it anyway,

so that's a good sign. Uh!

Jo is making a limoncello and white chocolate croquembouche,

covered in caramel and topped with spun sugar.

So, what have you got over at the end here?

My choux pastry is cooling down on a stone and then I'll add my eggs into it after that.

- We see all sorts of different processes. That's brand new to me.
- Oh, really?

Yes. I would just leave it in the pan and then put it to one side on a cold surface. It's going to work.

It's your way of doing it.

When the paste has cooled, beaten egg yolks are mixed in a little at a time.

The bakers must gauge when the mixture has reached the perfect glossy texture

which means its ready for piping.

The thing is to get the right consistency, not too sloppy and not too stiff.

Janet is making a vanilla and orange zest croquembouche, presented on a nougatine base.

There are certain things where you can be a bit more cavalier and do what you want, you know?

But I think with something like this, you do have to be a bit more precise, you know, really.

I am making a black forest gateaux croquembouche

with a gingerbread house and snowy scene inside.

So, I'm calling it Hansel and Gretel's Croquembouche.

Holly is putting a new twist on this French classic.

Instead of using caramel, her croquembouche will be held together with dark chocolate.

At Christmas, I'd never make something just for the adults,

I'd make something the children could have too.

- You're the perfect mum.
- Gosh, I'm really not.

You're the only one doing a double-narrative croquembouche.

- I mean, that is quite something. I'm looking forward to it.
- Good luck.
- Thank you.

OK, I think the flavours in there will be spectacular.

The idea of the cherry, the black forest theme, will be beautiful.

My only concern is how is it will bond without the use of caramel.

Come on, don't mess around.

Fiddly is not the word.

We're going to try for dainty.

The jury's out on whether it'll actually come off, but we're going to try.

Mary-Anne is making an orange and praline croquembouche,

held together with cardamom-flavoured caramel.

Just where I've finished piping, it's stuck up in a little cone.

I'm just using a damp finger to dab it down

so that it doesn't stick up and burn.

An hour into the showstopper bake and the first of many batches of choux buns go into the oven.

Choux pastry puffs up in the oven when the moisture evaporates.

Holly has a method that intensifies this process.

Basically, in the oven, the water turns into steam

and makes the pastry rise better, I think.

That's the theory anyway.

Out of the oven, the bakers prick their profiteroles to release the steam.

This prevents the buns from going soggy.

So now these, I'm looking around the room, mine are a lot darker than everybody else's.

Not bothered. I'm not fazed.

I like the colour.

Next, the bakers need to make their creme patisserie filling.

This is a French custard that has the addition of flour to stabilise it.

My creme patisserie for my croquembouche is flavoured with rose syrup,

because it's a favoured flavour in my house

and it looks really pretty.

The custard comes out a pink colour because of the syrup.

Yasmin's rose croquembouche will be covered in caramel

and decorated with sugared almonds.

Has she added pink colouring to this? Look.

- Look at this violent pink.
- Yes, I know. I watched.

This is creme patissiere with cream,

whipped double cream, and then it's got limoncello, lemon zest

and 300 grams of white chocolate running through it as well.

Jo's adding cream to her filling in the hope it will make the texture lighter.

Bakers, this is your halftime shout-out. You've got two and a half hours to go.

With so many choux buns to fill, the bakers need to maintain focus and momentum.

It's all quite lots of repetitive stuff.

Ow!

No time for slacking, that's for sure.

Inside this tent you've got five bakers baking desserts entirely from scratch.

However, post-war, Britain took on a very new approach to baking,

as technological advances in food production meant a rise in convenience baking.

Modern-day convenience foods are embraced by the nation.

It's estimated that the readymade dessert industry is worth 1.8 billion.

And some of the country's biggest manufacturers produce over seven million desserts a year.

But back in the 1950s, before these convenience foods were available,

British housewives had the desire to create delicious puddings, but lacked the necessary skills.

During the war, so many women were working in factories or on the fields that their offspring

were relatively de-skilled, and especially when it came to

very specific kinds of cooking, like baking,

they really couldn't keep up with previous generations.

These new housewives, even though they're struggling, are still expected to put a delicious pudding

on the table at the end of dinner, so that's where they really needed a helping hand.

The solution came in the form of pre-packaged meals that had been

developed by food manufacturers for the troops during the war.

By the 1960s, as they began to appear in the kitchens of Britain,

a new generation of domestic goddesses appeared and the age of convenience baking was born.

This is the era of the prepacked, the plastic-wrapped, and it's there to help

the woman who wants to slough off the perceived drudgery of cooking.

So, now you can get hold of all sorts of packet mixes

for instant whips and desserts and delights,

and, of course, the kind of ubiquitous late 1960s pudding,

the lemon meringue pie, where you did in fact have to still bake the case.

You also had to make the meringue, but the lemon curdy bit,

which was quite complicated, in the middle, came out of a packet.

And that was the great magic of the packet mix, that you could pretend that you weren't really cheating,

because you had to add an egg or a bit of lemon juice or a bit of milk and whisk it yourself.

The home freezer, first patented in 1923, only started to become affordable

to the masses in the 1970s, having a direct impact on the type of convenience desserts available.

Once more people had freezers at home, they no longer had to rely

on packet mixes, they could buy the readymade article direct from the supermarket.

Whether that's a Black Forest gateau, or a baked Alaska,

it just comes straight out, defrost and straight onto the table no effort whatsoever.

Part of the appeal of frozen desserts is that those kind of foods

are exactly the ones that it takes longest to make. They're finickety,

they require a certain amount of knowledge to bake.

And, therefore, frozen puddings were ideal for busy housewives who didn't want to spend all day cooking.

With over 98% of the British population eating a readymade dessert last year,

it would seem our love for convenience is as evident as our love for the desserts themselves.

A croquembouche can take up to a day to bake and assemble.

Our bakers have only an hour to go.

The caramel that binds the profiteroles together is the next big challenge.

I've done three lots of this at home. One lot really worked well...

and the other two didn't.

It's made by melting sugar to around 175 degrees.

In the pan, it must be shaken but not stirred.

Sugar always wants to return to its natural form and if you

start with granulated sugar, that's what it's gonna try and get back to.

So, if you stir it, it does something to the sugar crystals and

they just all go voom and within seconds you've got a solid lump.

And any tips on not burning my fingers, cos I've done a lot of that as well.

How much caramel or sugar are you gonna use here?

I'm going to make a big amount.

- When you bring it out, do you put it in cold water to stop it?
- No, I haven't been.

OK. It's a good tip though, to stop it burning more, cos it'll carry on...especially a large amount.

Once it's melted, caramel can turn from golden brown and delicious

to burnt and bitter in the blink of an eye.

It could go at any time!

We smell burning sugar.

Is that me? No, it isn't me.

Yes, I've burnt my sugar, my first lot. It's just gone over.

It was fine when I took it off, but as...

because there's so much of it, and I didn't get it in the water

quick enough, it hasn't cooled quick enough. So I'm making a second lot.

It's just like an amber pot of burning liquid.

With the caramel nearly twice as hot as boiling water, the bakers need to work with a great deal of care.

It's so hard not to burn your fingers though.

Ow. Ah!

Not only has Yasmin burnt her fingers, she's also ruined her

second attempt at making her caramel by splashing tap water into the pan.

I just wanna cry.

- Well, you can't help it! It's an unstable thing, isn't it?
- Mmm.

It's all right! You know, it's difficult.

This finger?

Yeah.

OK, that's 30 minutes, 30 minutes, until your croques are in my bouche!

Janet and Mary-Anne are going the extra mile

by making a nougatine base for their desserts

with flaked almonds and caramel.

I'm going to leave you in peace.

- And when it gets a bit cooler you can use your fingers.
- Yes.

Before the nougatine cools and becomes too brittle,

they mould it into the shapes they need for their bases.

It's terribly hot, cos it's caramel, isn't it?

I won't let it win.

The bakers must now start to build their towers.

I did practise with a cone and it was, oh, very... it wasn't a pretty sight. It collapsed.

So I'm going to build it freehand.

I figured that if things were going to go wrong I could see them and make adjustments.

Jo and Yasmin have both chosen to use a metal cone.

- You're filling the inside of the cone?
- Yes.

- And then you'll take the cone off?
- Yes.

I thought what you had to do was stick them on to the cone.

Oh, really?

Holly is making her own disposable paper cone.

With chocolate, it's so hard to get out, so you actually need to unpeel it, I think, to make it work.

Quarter of an hour left, bakers!

That's 15 minutes left!

Mmm, that's OK.

It's traditional for a croquembouche to be decorated with spun sugar.

Oh, that's good! Look, that's good!

'This is made by flicking liquid caramel until it forms hair-like strands.'

At home I'm a bit worried flicking it. Here, I might just flick it, because I haven't got to clear it.

You can only do what you can do.

There's no point in me pretending I'm amazing.

Just do the best I can.

For the bakers using cones, it's the moment of truth.

Have you got any longer ones of these?

OK, bakers, you've got one minute left!

The 60-second countdown has begun.

Don't fall off, please.

APPLAUSE

- Yeah!
- Ah, my fingers!

Let's see.

- Now, this is the big moment. Is it gonna fit?
- No.

It's like the hair of Rapunzel.

Ah!

OK, everyone, that's time up, please! Time up, everyone!

If you'd like to bring your croquembouche to the end of your benches!

I did everything that I could do and, apart from burning myself,

I'd probably do the same again.

I think my choux buns were quite crisp.

That was my major worry. I'm hoping they've stood up to being filled.

I think I did my best, given the time constraints.

It's a miniature version of what I wanted to do, really.

I hope they think it's a good effort.

I'm all ears as to whether they like the flavour combinations,

but they can't really rain on my parade.

Jo's tower is caving in and beginning to lose its shape.

So disappointed.

I just thought I was gonna have one week where I wasn't gonna be bottom of something again.

So, bakers, it's time for your succulent towers of delight to be judged.

So, what do we have here?

A bit of a deconstructed tower, by the looks of it.

Should have just used the creme patissiere, but I wanted it to be a lighter cream. But...

- Mmm.
- I realise now that was obviously the wrong thing.

You've answered your own question.

- I know.
- You were asked to do a tower and it really is for an event, for an occasion,

- and it's got to stand up when the guests are here.
- Yeah.

So, just remember, no cream with a creme patissiere.

- Mmm.
- They are to die for.

- Thank you, Mary.
- Oh.
- The caramel, it's crunchy. They're absolutely wonderful!

No complaints there.

- The caramel is delicious.
- Spun sugar too!

I think you've done a good job, but, unfortunately,

if you'd baked it and then used only the creme patisserie with the limoncello

you would have had a nicer, more stable croquembouche.

Thank you.

I like the look of it.

- They're great colours in there. I like the nougatine base too.
- Good.

- Some of the caramel has crystallised.
- Yes.

That is because you've stirred it.

I took some from the top and, you know, I might lose my teeth on it.

- Oh, sorry.
- I think your flavours are great!

- Mmm! Delicious!
- The filling is lovely. You've certainly got that orange coming through.

My only issue is the overall appearance of it. A little bit bigger maybe.

Yeah, you're right. No, I intended to make it bigger.

- Oh, did you?
- But I ran out of time.

I think my issues are that you've burnt the sugar

and the profiteroles look quite dark as well.

It's a shame when you overcooked the caramel.

- But it's well constructed and it's held up.
- It is constructed extremely well. It's a shame.

- The flavour of the rose is coming through, but it's been ruined by the caramel.
- Right.

- It's the bitterness is... is hanging on the tongue and that's down to the sugar.
- Yeah.

Close up it looks lovely.

It doesn't look so good from a distance.

Up close I can see some profiteroles, which I was very concerned about,

cos I think you may have overdone it slightly with the chocolate on the outside.

- I added more chocolate to try and make it crack.
- It is very...

- It's very bitter with that chocolate.
- I agree.

It's not sweet at all.

The actual profiteroles underneath are crisp, dried out and the cream in the middle,

- with that bit of cherry brandy is delicious, but over chocolaty.
- Mmm.

Now, Holly, underneath there is a gingerbread house.

Yes. The idea was I did one layer so you could take it off easily.

- Oh, isn't that...
- That's gorgeous.
- Yeah.

- I want to live in it.
- That's what an estate agent would call bijoux.
- It is absolutely sweet.

Mary-Anne, that really has held up well.

I think you've got a nice crisp on the profiteroles as well.

And you've done spun sugar and very well done spun sugar.

Thank you.

- They taste very good.
- Mmm.

Your creme patisserie is absolutely perfect.

The cardamom is just coming through.

- Mmm, it's an after...
- Mmm.
- It sits on the tongue.

- I'd like to have seen the profiteroles a bit bigger. Just a little.
- I was being dainty!

You're being dainty.

- Thanks very much, Mary-Anne.
- Well, done, Mary-Anne.
- Good effort.

Listen, that was a really tough and exacting challenge.

Please go and have a cup of tea.

Obviously, Paul and Mary are going to retire to consider their verdict

and to decide who is going to progress.

They loved the flavours, but obviously, you know, it collapsed!

So, I am really, really, really disappointed in myself.

You know, I would have liked them to like it, and I just don't feel that they did really.

Today has not gone very well for various reasons, so, yeah, I think I'm going home!

On balance, over the three challenges, Paul, who would you put in the frame to be Star Baker?

Up until today I would have said Jo instantly if this had sort of stood up proudly.

But the interesting one and the best for me was Mary-Anne,

because she had a little bit of cardamom in it

and she had a very interesting creme patissiere

that she'd bothered to add that extra orange and so forth.

We shall leave that dilemma with you two.

Who do you think we might be saying goodbye to?

At this stage it's extremely tricky over the three challenges,

where you get one's good in another and weak in another. It was a really bad week for Holly.

She was at the bottom on two. But Yasmin had an equally pretty bad couple of challenges.

When you look at Yasmin's profiterole, it's overcooked

and the bitterness coming from that sugar is breathtakingly bad.

Holly has really disappointed me. I mean, she has great technique.

She could tackle anything, she's an experienced cook, she's shown us

all the way through, and then she goes boom down this week.

I think we have to look back retrospectively regarding Holly and Yasmin,

because at this stage it is really difficult to pick between them.

I think what we'll both look at now is the technical challenges since the very beginning.

That gives us the level playing field we need to be able to

make that decision who is going to leave us today.

The remaining five bakers have competed for six gruelling weeks.

For one of them, their dream of winning the Great British Bake Off will soon be over.

Let's start on a positive note, and the question, of course, of this week's Star Baker.

Now, I think it's fair to say that, before today, there was no question in Paul and Mary's minds

that the Star Baker accolade should be given to Jo.

But with the sad demise, shall we say, the little collapse that went on with the croquembouche,

they had to go back to the drawing board and rethink.

However, because of the sublimeness of your flavours

and the outstanding deliciousness of the whole croquembouche experience,

and I can say because I had a lot of it myself...

- And I had the other half.
- ..it's coming right back at you, Jo. You're Star Baker.
- Well done, you!

Brilliant work.

And now for the harder and sharper end of the spectrum.

This week was a very tough call. It was the closest call we have ever had.

In fact, two people were so sharply in contention that Paul and Mary have had to go back

and look at the results of all of the technical bakes this series. That is how tight it was.

And so, after reviewing all that, the person that very sadly will be leaving us...

..is Yasmin.

The rest of you, congratulations, you are semi-finalists. Well done.

- I'm so sorry.
- No, don't be sorry. I'm relieved.
- Really?
- I'm relieved.

'I'm going because my baking's not up to scratch, obviously. I've had a fair innings'

and I'm pleased with how far I got.

You did brilliantly!

You made the quarter final!

That's a massive achievement. Well done.

- Oh, Janet.
- Poor little sweetheart.

I feel terrible.

You live and learn. I'm really lucky to be there next week, really lucky.

I feel like I owe it to Yasmin to do well.

I feel like, you know, that's my, my job now is to kind of do us both proud, so...

It became very obvious that Holly was stronger in the Technical Challenges than Yasmin,

therefore Yasmin had to leave.

It was a shame, but it was the only fair way we could look at it.

Chuffed still to be here. I mean, I've loved doing all the challenges, so go me!

I'm just amazed that I'll be in the semi-final, you know?

I don't think I've been in the semi-final of anything in my life before!

To get Star Baker and to be in the final four is like, yes!

Yeah, yeah, it's really good.

Next time, it's the semi-final.

Definitely feel the pressure more, now there's only four of us left.

Having gone through this, it'd be a shame to go out now.

And the bakers must showcase their patisserie skills to perfect some famed pastries and cakes.

Could all go wrong at any point really.

Making their signature mousse cakes.

I don't know what has gone on there!

Paul sets his final technique challenge - iced fingers.

What's in a few grams? But they will make a difference.

I just know he's going to have his eagle eye.

And it's the most demanding showstopper yet -

12 intricate croissant and Danish pastries.

I could look at the fillings and go, "No. I don't like that. Don't like that. Don't like that."

- But who will fail at the last hurdle?
- I can't believe I did that.

And who will make it to the grand final of the Great British Bake Off?

Our search to find Britain's finest amateur baker has taken us on an incredible journey.

We have seen airbrushed cakes, we've seen macaroon topiary,

we've seen croque-en-bouche skyscrapers.

Now there are four bakers remaining.

Welcome to the semi-final of The Great British Bake Off.

Last week, the bakers got stuck into desserts.

What level of stress? Give me a number between one and ten.

- Nine and three quarters.
- Oh, my lord.

This doesn't count as a roulade. It looks like a disaster area.

Let's face it, I'm just showing off for the judges.

- Jo won the Star Baker accolade...
- THEY APPLAUD



- They are to die for.
- ..and Holly had a narrow escape...

It's over-baked, which has make it dry and claggy.

..struggling to keep her place in the bake off...

I'm really lucky, REALLY lucky.

..but instead, the judges decided that Yasmin's time was up.

This week, the semi-final...

Now I'm feeling hurry-scurry coming on.

..and the bakers must demonstrate

a variety of new and different skills...

- Don't know what has gone on.
- Can't believe I did that.

..including the most sophisticated of all,

croissant and Danish pastry dough...

It's blooming hard work.

If we don't get through today that's it. We're going home.



..but which of these five exceptional home bakers have the talent and passion

to fight for a place in the final of the Great British Bake Off?

We're being British and going, "We want everyone to do well,"

and actually we're all going, "Die, one of you, die!"

This week, it's all about patisserie,

which is a French word, roughly translates as,

"Oh, I'm going to have to let the waistband out on my trousers."

This competition represents the yin and yang of baking.

You've got the bakers inside, sweating nervously,

but on the outside you've got two presenters, pleased as Punch, calm as you like,

just waiting to eat the whole lot.

Bakers, good morning and welcome.

We are one small step away from crowning Britain's best amateur baker.

So we'll kick off with a signature bake

and we're asking you to bake a layered mousse cake.

Now, how many layers you produce is entirely up to you

and also the filling is entirely up to you.

We need the sponge to be light and moist,

and we need the filling to be rich and creamy. That's a personal request.

You've got two hours on the clock.

On your marks...

- Get set...
- Bake.

With a place in the final within their grasp,

the bakers know they have to deliver their very best to the judging table, in every challenge.

I was panicking before I came in, I was getting really stressed

cos it's the semi-final you, sort of, feel the pressure more.

Cos I'm thinking so much that my head's too full of thoughts.

You're thinking so much that you can't think.

It's really stressful.

Patisserie is a term used to describe delicate fancy cakes and pastries.

The signature mousse cakes will be judged on their flavour,

the bake and how they're layered and decorated.

It's more important than ever to meet the expected high standards of the judges,

acclaimed master baker Paul Hollywood

and distinguished cookery writer and baker, Mary Berry.

The sponge must be light and moist,

the mousse must be creamy and thick

and then finally, you can't just get away at this stage

bunging a strawberry on the top.

It has to have the finesse to finish off a great cake.

Right now, they've got to up their game

and with the final looming next week

I'm expecting exceptional results today.

Jo starts by making her sponge mix.

The baked sponge will then form the structural layers of her mousse cake.

Hello, Jo. Now, the smell of raspberries is overcoming us all.

Tell us exactly what you're doing.

I'm making a Gen... Gen...

- Genoese?
- Genoese?
- Genoese sponge and I'm making a raspberry mousse for the middle.

You're comfortable with the timing? It's quite tight...

And I can see from the look on your face you're saying, "Please go away and leave me in peace!"

For Jo, taking part in the bake off represents more than just a chance to indulge one of her hobbies.

'When I got married I was only 17,'

so I've never really had a career or anything

and it would be nice if I could get the confidence

to do something for myself afterwards.

I really want to prove to myself that I can do this.

This will be such a major achievement for me.

Jo's hoping that her raspberry and strawberry mousse cake,

layered with a technically challenging Genoese sponge,

will book her a place in the final.

The texture of a Genoese sponge is light and delicate

and one of the most difficult to pull off.

I don't make these lots at home. It's something quite new to me.

Unlike a standard sponge, no raising agents are added.

Instead, air is beaten into the mixture to create volume.

I think there's more pressure because it's so important.

If we don't get through today, that's it, we're going home.

I'm certainly feeling it - I just need to grab a bowl, sorry.

Definitely a tough challenge, time-wise.

Not long to make something like this.

Holly is also making a Genoese sponge.

However, she's struggling to create the necessary foamy texture.

I don't know what has gone on there.

Dreadful. Ergh!

I could have got away with it not looking perfect on week one,

but week seven I can't,

and I REALLY would love to be in the final,

and I never thought I'd be like this kind of obsessed with it!

- THREE!
- Yes, three! Well done.

Since having children, Holly has taken a break from her career in advertising.

- She is a methodical and precise baker.
- That's it.

'My competitiveness comes out in being quite focused.'

I have to focus when I'm working.

'I'm the sort of person who likes to practise,'

I know that if I don't practise something it usually will go wrong.

I'm not someone who can wing it and I get quite upset if things don't go well.

Holly's hoping that her weeks of meticulous planning

and baking homework will pay off today

with her white chocolate, hazelnut and raspberry Genoese mousse cake.

- Hi, Holly.
- Hello.
- So, a Genoese is being made, is it?

Yes, a bit of a disaster, it wasn't doing what it was supposed to.

What was going wrong?

It wasn't rising enough as it was being whisked,

I thought it was going to be flat if it goes in like that.

- You were doing it over hot water?
- Yes.

- Could be the eggs.
- Not fresh enough?
- Yeah.

A fresh egg makes more volume than an egg that you've kept for a long time

because the whites go runny.

A really fresh egg, when you crack it, the white clings to the yolk.

Is your pan still boiling, or has it stopped boiling now?

- Still boiling.
- I would just take it off the heat.

You can over-boil it by putting too much heat underneath.

- You only should put it on the least boiling water and that's it.
- Oh, OK.

It's the first time I've ever made this particular type of sponge.

What it is, it's one without butter.

I think I probably did make one back in the dark ages, you know.

In fact, Janet's signature mousse cake is untested.

I don't think that's bad, actually.

All this practising rubbish...

looks a bit floppy, doesn't it?

Shall we cut it in half and give half to you and your mummy?

Grandmother Janet spent many years living abroad as a language teacher.

She learned to adapt her baking to whatever ingredients were available.

My baking is very haphazard.

'I dip in the cupboard and if I haven't got enough'

I'll find something else to put in...

Look out for the train.

'..I'm not into, like, to the ounce.

'Raymond Blanc would say, "Oh, the last gram matters."'

Well, tough, because I don't do that last gram!

Janet has decided to make chocolate amaretto mousse cake

with a notable difference.

So, I'm making a shortbread base,

thinking that if I make sponge on the base

it could all flop when I get it out

and then I thought I'll make my mousse, pipe on the mousse

and then put a layer of cake,

brush that with Amaretto liqueur,

put another layer of mousse, another layer of cake...

- Chocolate mousse, is it?
- Chocolate mousse

- and then the Amaretto liqueur brushed on the...
- In the sponge.

- Yeah.
- This is a recipe you've been making for some time

- with a variation?
- With a variation.

Experimental baker Mary-Anne

once again attempts something unique with her bake.

Instead of baking a cake and cutting it into thin layers,

I'm just baking a very thin layer of cake,

and just to make it a little bit more pretty

I'm going to be doing a decor paste pattern in the sponge.

Decor paste is made by mixing together unsalted butter,

icing sugar, egg whites, flour and food colouring.

It's then piped and frozen to set.

I like doing something that's just a little bit different.

It'll either work in my favour or against me.

Sponge batter can then be spread on top without affecting the pattern.

Can you find the pepper...

in the drawer?

Mary-Anne's passionate about inventing new recipes.

She gets her ideas from her vast collection of new

and historical recipe books.

I've got pushing 700 recipe books

and if I'm not baking I am reading about baking.

'I have no formal qualifications.'

All I've done is read an awful lot of books

and I think, "Well, I know which end of a spoon is up,"

so I have a go - sometimes it's great and sometimes it's not,

but if it's not so great I've learned something.

Her chocolate and orange mousse cake

is created with joconde sponge layers.

This is almost flourless and fatless,

making it easy to manipulate for intricate bakes.

The maverick of the group, Mary-Anne...

What I'm fascinated to see,

she's got orange and chocolate, colours representing the flavours,

that pattern round the outside is going to be fantastic.

As long as she manages to set everything in time,

it could be a really beautiful thing.

I'm thinking simple...

well executed,

could, actually, win against fancy, not quite so well finished off.

That's what I'm hoping, anyway.

OK, there's an hour remaining. Just one hour remaining.

You're halfway through.

For better or worse, here we go.

SHE LAUGHS

It's just not coming up like it does at home.

In they go.

Modern patisserie is a glamorous mix of high-tech design and creativity.

With dramatic window displays and brightly coloured confectionary,

this is baking at the highest level.

The art of patisserie in Britain dates back to the Regency period,

in the early 19th century.

Favoured at the time by international royalty,

Parisian chef, Marie-Antoine Careme,

worked for the Prince Regent at the Royal Brighton Pavilion.

It's a gloriously glamorous period in the history of food

and a period when people are obsessed by food arts,

by gastronomy, by the glamour of food.

Careme was a very important innovator.

He believed in actually building with food

and created extraordinary follies, really, hermitages,

fallen temples, ruins, made out of pastry and sugar,

freely mixing all the decorative and architectural styles of the period.

He wanted to shout, "Patisserie is art,

"it's as important as a great building or painting,

"a great piece of sculpture."

It's not really the way that he pipes meringue that advances patisserie.

It's the way he piles up the meringues in the shop window

and the carriages stop to look,

and that was really the key to his fashionability

and the importance of his patisserie. It was food theatre.

Cited as an early practitioner of this elaborate style of baking,

Careme was unique,

in that he documented his works in highly illustrated books.

With these as reference, his artistic approach to patisserie

continues to influence the work of patissiers today.

Modern patisserie, it's all about glamour, sophistication,

bringing the dream to the client,

showcasing amazing display and, of course, all about the taste.

In the old days, the clients,

the most important thing was what the cake was going to look like.

They didn't even start to think what it could taste like and that's a huge revolution now.

People want the cake or the dessert to taste as good as it looks.

There is more to patisserie than just making delicious cake.

It's the whole concept, really, of sophistication and glamour.

From the Regency kitchens to our modern chic confectioners,

patisserie is one area of baking that is a true art form.

Fab Four, you've got half an hour left.

30 minutes on the baking clock.

Yeah, they look nice, and they smell really lovely as well.

To be honest, my second sponge isn't brilliant

and I feel like I, kind of, already know what's going to happen.

I'm just really, really upset with myself.

- Oh, yeah.
- Oh, well done.
- It's a nice effect.

I'm actually going to cut a strip of this

and use it to line a spring-form pan

- and then cut another circle and use that as the base...
- Yeah.

..and then put the mousse in and have another circle

- with the pattern showing on the top.
- A 360 pattern.
- Fantastic.
- Thank you.

- It's brilliant - it's a cake and a children's activity centre! Perfect.
- Thanks.

I am now painting the sponges

with some highly alcoholic hazelnut liqueur, which is delicious.

I'm just going to drizzle in some framboise,

which is a raspberry liqueur, just a little bit of a taste, that's all.

Time is ticking away.

The bakers must make their mousse

so they can start to construct their layered cakes.

It's called iced chocolate Amaretto mousse.

Everybody loves it,

so, you can't go wrong if you make something people like, can you?

Mousse is made by mixing the baker's chosen flavour with cream, sugar

and then thickened with either beaten egg whites or gelatine.

The mousse must be light and airy,

but strong enough to support the sponge layers.

Really, it is quite nerve racking!

The only thing you can do

is strengthen it with support of fruit round the outside

to prevent that two layers on top concertinaing the sponge,

so standing up fruit round the outside is a bit of a tip.

This is the praline crumb.

It didn't go brilliantly well at the start,

but I think I've brought it back.

The problem for me is that I have in my mind

something which is not the reality.

Make it up as you go along, really.

With time running out, Mary-Anne has made a crucial mistake.

I've put the sponge the wrong way round on half of it.

I can't believe I did that.

Bakers, the end is almost nigh.

You've got 60 seconds left.

They're leaning slightly.

- Just don't say.
- OK.
- I reckon they won't even...

- (They'll never know.)
- No.

Bakers, time is very much up now.

There is a mousse loose aboot this hoose!

- And we're going to eat it.
- Yup.

Mary and Paul's critique of the layered mousse cakes

is crucial to the bakers' chances of making the grand final.

Very nice.

It's set well.

I mean, it's set really well.

Looks good, I think I would have liked another layer of sponge.

The ratio to mousse,

it should be equal and we've got much more mousse.

A tad over generous.

- It tastes lovely.
- Mm.
- It really does.

Very clever idea to put the shortbread.

- I thought it would be too thick, it isn't at all too thick.
- No.

I think the overall appearance, it needed to be more polished,

but the flavours are great.

- Good.
- It's really nice.
- Good. OK, thank you.
- Well done.

I think your Genoese, it's a little bit dry, but the flavour's great.

- I think the praline's superb.
- The praline is excellent.

I'm just debating whether it would have worked more as a flatter cake

with less weight, with more mousse because the flavour of that mousse is fantastic.

And also, I would have liked to see a raspberry glaze over the top.

It doesn't look finished to me.

The strawberries, although they're magnificent,

- they're too big...
- Yes.
- ..for the cake.

- They will not give you the stability that you're looking for.
- Yes.

If you halve a small one, it would give you the stability

cos it would have the edge.

- Thinner, structured layers would have been nicer than one big fat one.
- Mm.

The Genoese is too dry.

You must have lost a bit of height.

The mousse mixture, if you look carefully there are lumps of white,

but as we walked up to it, it certainly looked stunning.

- You wouldn't miss that on a tea table, would you?
- No.

- Oh.
- What happened to the other side?

Erm... We have beauty on the inside!

It's not just that I put it the wrong way round, no, no.

- I personally think this looks great.
- The mousse is very good.

Your sponge is baked well, it's very, very light

and I think you've done a... I think you've done a really good job.

- You've shown us so many skills.
- Thank you.
- Well done!
- Thank you.

Yes, they really liked it,

I'm really pleased that despite my gaffe, they enjoyed it.

They liked the flavour, actually.

I was pleased that they liked the Amaretto that was coming through the sponge,

that they liked the shortbread base, which was still nice and crispy.

So, it wasn't all bad at all, you know.

I thought that looked really good. They didn't.

That's quite difficult, now,

because I just don't have that standard they want.

I'm a bit disappointed about the comments, obviously they weren't the best.

So I'll have to just try a bit harder this afternoon.

With only three places in the final up for grabs,

the bakers now face the challenge they all fear...

the technical.

There is no time to prepare,

as the recipe is only revealed at the start of the timed challenge.

Today's technical challenge is one of my all-time favourites.

Iced fingers.

Indeed, and not just any iced fingers.

These are Paul Hollywood's own iced fingers. OK?

So we need 12 identical fingers.

We want them filled with cream and jam

and, as always, this one is going to be judged blind,

so Paul and Mary, I'm going to ask you if you'd mind leaving the tent.

- So please, on your marks, get set, bake.
- Bake.

All four bakers have been given the same ingredients.

The judges have stripped back the recipe

to put their knowledge and skill to the test.

Never in my life have I made an iced bun.

It's not a thing I'd be yearning to make normally,

but, you know, I might be converted.

I'm sure Mary and Paul must have had some sort of spy camera on me all my life

and just doing everything that I've never made before.

No, I've never made iced buns before,

mind you, I'd never made pork pies before and I got second in that, so...

it's all to play for.

The iced finger dough the bakers are working with

contains the additional ingredients of milk and sugar,

which gives the fingers a richer taste,

but these make the dough respond differently when being shaped and baked.

What I've learned from technical bakes

is don't mess with the instructions or ingredients, just do what it says.

Follow the rules.

Obviously you've got to get the dough really good

and get the elasticity and everything.

Oh, I'm not really great at the technical.

I know roughly how things should feel,

but I don't know the physics of everything.

Kneading stretches the gluten strands

created by mixing the flour and water together.

If the bakers cut short this process, the fingers will not rise properly.

I'm not 100% sure how he wants them to look at the end,

which is always tricky in the technical.

I've got an image in MY mind.

Whether that's what's in Paul's mind...

Now, there are several criteria I'll be looking for.

The first thing is the colour of the bun, it has to be cooked properly.

The second thing is the shape - all even, all the same size.

The icing must be perfect

and the texture of that bun must be lovely and soft.

Consistency is what they look for, especially in the batches and they want 12.

And when the judges ask for a batch

they want consistency across the batch...

..which is why I'm taking the time to make sure

that the dough is approximately the same weight,

about 85 grams in each one.

What are a few grams? But they will make a difference.

I just know he's going to have his eagle eye

looking for unequal looking buns.

(It's very quiet, isn't it?)

It's because the competition is now insanely intense.

- Have you all talked about...
- No.
- ..openly?

We're being really British and going,

"No, we all want everyone to do so well,"

and actually we're all going, "Die, one of you, die!", you know.

So, it literally is very much the British bake off, isn't it?

- It so is.
- It's so British.
- So is.

All these mums going, "Oh, I just want everyone to do well."

No, you don't.

You want someone to leave.

MEL TITTERS

The shaped fingers go into the proving drawer.

The warm temperature accelerates the activity of the yeast.

This fermentation process produces carbon dioxide,

which should puff the fingers up to double their size.

They're not looking very high, you know.

I can't even remember what they're supposed to look like any more.

You know, you sort of buy one, don't you,

and you don't examine it really for height and width, so...

just going to have to hope they're OK.

OK, you're halfway through.

Never having made them before,

I don't know how much these are going to rise,

so I don't know if I've got them spaced far enough apart.

Well, you've just got to go for it at some stage.

For better or worse, get in and cook.

A perfect iced finger should be soft, light and airy.

Under-baked and they will be too doughy in the middle...

- (Oh, look at those.)
- Have to turn them round.

You see the end ones are getting a little bit burned.

How long have they been in? They need two more minutes, officially.

Over-baked and the batch will become tough and crispy.

- A good dollop of icing will cover a multitude of sins.
- Good.

Some are slightly darker than the others.

They're nice and light.

- Oh!
- They're not very dainty.

- Iced fingers aren't supposed to be dainty!
- Oh, right.

You've got to stuff your face with them. Look at that, the way it rips apart.

I'm salivating really badly.

Actually, they look OK. I'm actually quite happy with that.

15 minutes, Bake Off queens, for your icing and slicing.

Oops! The pips keep blocking up the nozzle,

so I'm going to try sieving it a bit.

I wasn't going to sieve it and then...

actually sat too long, watched everybody else and decided to.

I don't want to take any risks.

Oh!

Gosh, blooming hard work!

Now, to put the icing on top of the fingers you use the dip technique,

which is literally just dip in, run your finger across the top

and then leave it to set.

- That's what I'd call water icing...
- A water icing, yes.

- ..a simple icing sugar and water.
- That's right.

- So this was Paul's way.
- Yes.
- This is dipping.

This is dipping. I don't like the dipped look.

I lost half of it on the table where it all dripped down.

I'll try and tidy this up a little.

I didn't trust myself to be able to dip into a thick paste,

so I thought I would put a line of icing across the top.

I'm quite good at making things look the same,

so even if they don't taste that good

I hope I'll get a couple of points for the fact they look similar.

I want to do the best icing I can, so I'm sort of smearing it.

- Boutique feminisation about to occur.
- Oh, I don't know, ooh.

A slight sense of, sort of, scar tissue, isn't there, with it? MARY-ANNE LAUGHS

- What you've done basically is you've made Frankenstein's buns.
- Yes.

Bakerettes, you've got 60 seconds left on the clock.

OK, fingers to the ends of benches.

Time up.

They're done, for better or worse.

Mary and Paul always judge the technical bake blind.

They have no idea which batch belongs to which baker.

- Gosh. Don't they look good?
- I'm pleasantly surprised.

They're a pretty even batch across the field.

They do smell very, very good, all of them.

The texture's good.

It's soft, it's got an equal colour.

The icing hasn't covered the whole top, but the idea is nice.

It's got a nice taste, hasn't it?

- Mm.
- It's very, very good.
- Absolutely delicious.

And it's SO soft.

- Nice amount of jam.
- The only thing I'd say was it needs more cream.

There is not enough cream in there. OK, let's move on to this one.

This one looks a little bit paler, a little bit fat.

There's a dough line that's running along the bottom,

which needed another couple of minutes. It's not quite done inside.

A bit tight at the bottom, isn't it?

The icing's nice enough.

The cream and jam's good.

It's a fairly uniform shape,

but it's the bake that's let that one down.

Now, this one, it's got more of a uniform icing on it,

although the icing was a little bit too wet,

that's why it's run down the side.

That's got a good bake, that one. It's nice and soft.

The texture's good. Some of them are a bit irregular.

- They all have to be the same size. OK?
- Mm.

These are nice, good even bake. Icing's not bad.

- Quite nice, this zigzag...
- Perfect size.
- ..finish here, isn't it?

It's got a nice finish, bit of arty flair.

Just done. Another minute too less they wouldn't have been baked. As it is, they're baked fine.

These are far nicer than any...

..Shop bought ones.

Yes. I've never had such delicious ones. They really are good.

- Lovely and buttery.
- I think you've all done really well.

You should be very proud of yourselves.

That was the doughy one.

The judges must now make their final deliberation.

These two were good.

Two, three, four.

In fourth is this one here.

They were not quite done at the bottom.

In third place, we've gone for this one.

- Me.
- Normally you dip in and then run your finger along it.

They would have been fantastic. The flavour was very good, but it's purely

based on aesthetics with this one.

And number two, a little bit of originality with the jam,

absolutely delicious.

And that leaves Holly, number one. These are a great iced finger.

The bake, the colour, the texture,

- the flavour, it was all there. Well done.
- Well done, all of you.

- Well done, everyone.
- Yay!

'I'm really, really pleased.'

I really needed that after this morning.

I feel like I'm back on a level playing field

in an average position, because this morning didn't go so well.

I needed to do well this afternoon. I also need to do well tomorrow as well.

'It was a bit disappointing, you know, because I thought I'd done OK.'

I'm going to have to pull out all the stops tomorrow, I think.

'Could have been worse.'

I could have been bottom.

But, hey. Bring on tomorrow.

It's the showstopper, and the bakers' last chance to prove they're worthy of one of the three places

in the Great British Bake Off final.

Here we are, halfway through the semi-final.

- Who's in danger, who's looking good?
- I think Mary-Anne has come up and up.

Her cake was so professional.

Holly, I didn't much like her mousse cake,

and then in the iced buns she won, so she's picked herself up slightly.

Janet's failed on the iced bun, but her cake was fantastic.

- So, again, she's got it all to play for.
- Let's move on to Jo.

- She's in serious trouble.
- Her cake didn't have the finish.

She had a cream filling but there were lumps of unmixed cream in it.

But then you look at the iced bun challenge and I think she was second from bottom in that one as well,

so at the moment, Mary-Anne's fairly safe, but Holly, Janet and Jo are all in the danger zone.

Your showstopper challenge this week, ladies, we'd like you to make, please, a selection of pastries.

Danish pastries, pain au chocolat, or your simple

all-butter croissant, but we'd like you to make all the pastries, please, out of the same dough.

And that dough, when put in the oven, needs to be crispy and golden on the outside

and it needs to be soft and buttery on the inside.

And you'll know, as experienced home bakers, that this process takes a long time.

So, bakers, on your marks,

- get set...
- Bake.

The bakers are producing three different types of pastries, all to be made from the same dough.

This dough, known as layered or laminated pastry,

is labour-intensive and technically demanding.

It's created by repeatedly rolling and folding alternate layers of butter and dough.

This particular showstopper is, for me, the hardest one we've had so far.

You have to make your dough, you have to fold the dough,

you have to choose your shape, you have to roll it out to a perfect level,

then you have to choose your filling, then prove and bake.

It's difficult to get to perfection. It's all about the stages.

I'm looking for some unusual shapes and a very professional finish.

They should be well risen, a lovely golden brown,

so they've got to look right, they've got to taste really special.

First they make their dough, a classic sweet bread dough made from flour, yeast, salt, sugar and water.

This is kneaded until elastic.

It could all go wrong at any point, really.

I mean, this probably is the most essential bit.

To get the base of the dough, you've got to have a good foundation to then have a good pastry.

Jo is making a classic pain aux raisins, chocolate twists

and her own original invention, a banana and raisin pastry.

The banana and raisin, how are you putting that into the Danish? As a pain aux raisins style?

- As a, you know, the folded one...
- Oh, right, got you.

- The square with the bits folded in.
- Yeah. Mm.
- Fantastic.

I think banana and raisin works a treat.

I've never had a banana and raisin one before.

I've had an apple and raisin one.

I adapted it with a banana because I thought that might be quite nice.

- What yeast did you use in your...? - I used the fast action.

- We've learnt which Paul liked best. - It's a good tip for me.

The bakers now need to introduce a layer of butter into their bread dough.

Are you having that as well?

Yeah, it has to have a pound of butter.

Oh, my...

This is an obscene amount of butter!

The dough is wrapped around the slab of butter.

This is the way I do it. Just get it into a block and then you make sure that every bit of pastry has got

the same amount of butter in it, and the same amount of layers.

The bakers then roll the pastry out.

You don't want the butter to start melting

and you want to keep it quite firm because it'll then stay in layers when you fold it.

If it starts warming up, it will sort of ooze out of the edges.

Next it is folded...

covered with cling wrap...

and left to rest in the fridge.

This process is repeated at least three times over four hours to create the layers.

I've never made croissants or Danish pastries before

and I think it's such a laborious process.

If someone else can make something better than you can then you should probably buy it.

Holly is making apricot, macadamia and white chocolate pinwheels,

almond croissants and apple, raisin and cinnamon plaits.

- How's it going?
- Not too bad.

I can tell when you look at this in particular, now what you're looking for is a marble, and you can see

the marble in there, which is an indication of a decent dough.

The dough now needs to prove in the fridge for 12 hours.

The cold temperature allows the gluten to relax while the yeast causes the dough to rise.

The croissant. It's about as Francais as striking, smoking and randomly shrugging.

Bouf! Ah, mais non. In fact, the mythology and history of the croissant

is as rich, multi-layered and intriguing as the pastry itself.

What we do know for sure is that the croissant

is not French. Sweet pastry was brought back to medieval Europe

from the Middle East by soldiers returning from the Crusades,

and croissant-like pastries were being consumed in Austria

long before there is any record of their arrival in France.

According to one legend, the story of the croissant began in Vienna in 1683.

Some bakers, working through the night, heard digging,

and Turks were discovered trying to tunnel under the city wall.

In honour of this, a pastry was created to represent the crescent on the Turkish flag

and named the kipferl, meaning crescent.

In the late 1830s, the Boulangerie Viennoise opened in Paris and began

selling kipferl, which quickly adopted the French equivalent name of croissant, also meaning crescent.

Around the turn of the 20th century, it evolved from the brioche style

dough of the kipferl into the light puff pastry we know today.

Since then, we've added almonds, chocolate, even cheese,

all 20th-century additions to the original.

Whatever the truth about their origins, croissants have been sold and baked here

in Paris since the middle of the 19th century, where they sold

like hot pastries to members of the aristocracy,

and one of the first places to bake them was right here, in the heart of the city.

The same amount of pastry, fifty-fifty.

'Although the rolling is now done by machines, this part of the process used to be a gruelling task,

'with French patissier chefs hand rolling large volumes of dough until thin sheets of pastry were formed.

'Still today, the most difficult part of the process is done by hand.'

And I'm going to do it in six seconds.

So I'm thinking you stretch it, and that's going to break in a minute.

- And then...
- Then you roll.
- Roll it.

This is the fattest croissant that ever was.

This is a British croissant.

I think we've found out that when it comes to this particular pastry,

it's very much England nil, France 1. Well done, you lot.

I'm very sad to see my croissants aren't there. Very sad. But these are yours. Let's try them.

- OK.
- Mm.

Mm. It's the best.

- So you do speak English?
- Only that.

While the dough is still resting in the fridge, the bakers begin to prepare their fillings.

I'm just making the caramelised bananas there for my topping,

and creme patissiere for my pain aux raisins and my chocolate twists.

That's looking nice now. That's just how it should be.

Beautiful.

Creme patissiere is a classic French custard filling, stabilised with flour.

It's technically challenging, as the mix needs to come off the heat at exactly the right moment.

Too thick, it becomes claggy when baked. Too loose and it will leak out of the pastry.

I wish this stuff would hurry up and thicken.

I'm stirring it quite carefully, and I don't want a pan of scrambled eggs.

It's just using a lot of time, but if I don't do it I don't have

pain aux raisins, so it's Hobson's Choice, really.

Janet is going for the classic French trio -

together with pain aux raisins, she's also baking plain croissants and pain au chocolat.

You've got creme patissiere in there and you're being very careful to keep it at a low temperature.

- Yes.
- The essential thing is not to overheat it and to stir all the time.
- Yes, that's right, yes.

Because if you over-cook it, you'll get a very nasty texture.

I'm quite sure you're not going to do that.

No. That's why I took it off the thing while we're talking.

I prefer savoury things over sweet things and although I think the two

sweet flavours I've got lined up are really nice, I wanted one for me.

For her pastries, Mary-Anne's creating raspberry rose Danishes,

praline spirals and also savoury Alsatian plaited Danishes.

- Hello.
- Hi, Mary-Anne.
- Mary-Anne.

- Hi.
- Now, Mary-Anne, you're the only one to do a savoury Danish pastry.

Yeah. It comes from the Alsace region of France.

They make a kind of pizza, usually with very thin bread dough and a bit of creme fraiche, onion, bacon

and goats' cheese, so I thought I'd take that and transfer it to the filling of a Danish pastry.

It's interesting. I am really looking forward to this.

That's a bit of a "could be good, could be bad" when Paul says "interesting".

- Good luck.
- Thank you very much.
- Go for it. See you later.
- Thank you.

She certainly is the one who always experiments and pushes the boat out,

- and usually it works.
- Yes.

I could look at the fillings and go no, no, no, don't like that, don't like that.

But Mary-Anne's surprised me in the past, so I'm reserving judgment

because I've never heard of those fillings before.

I just expect to be wowed.

OK, there's an hour remaining, bakers.

The chilled doughs finally come out.

While in the fridge, the dough has also been proving and should be double in size.

Could have been a bit puffier, but I did wrap it quite tightly because the two times that I've practised

this dough, it's burst out of the Clingwrap and it's dried out where it's been exposed to the air in

the refrigerator, so I really didn't want that to happen, so wrapped it

quite tightly and that might have constricted it a bit.

I'm just going to cut it into

three so that I know what I've got for each section of pastry.

To make a croissant, the dough needs to be cut into a triangular shape.

I looked up on the internet what the size should be and then I tried a few different sizes

and decided that 28 centimetres long by 12 centimetres across was the optimum size.

I've practised the shaping quite a bit at home because it's quite hard to do, frankly.

So I wanted to sort of prove I could make a croissant, but it's not easy.

Come on. Don't let me down.

I rolled mine up and I don't know whether they were too wide for the length or something.

Anyhow, they're proving to be a disaster.

They're not very well shaped.

You know, I'm looking at Holly's and I wish I hadn't looked.

45 minutes to go. The bakers shape and fill their pastries.

Really, these three pastries are the embodiment of the bake off

to me because the raspberry rose one reminds me of Mary because it's pink and delicate,

and then I've done praline because of Paul, who said last week he quite liked it.

Shameless attempt to curry favour with the judges.

Janet, I've been admiring your buns from afar and, quite frankly, they're so large,

you can be at any point in the tent and be aware of their beauty.

- I mean, look at that. That's a lovely bit of pastry.
- I really hope they'll be nice.

They probably should have been an inch wide, but I thought, what the hell, I might as well use the lot.

OK, this is your Danish countdown, 25 minutes remaining.

At home, I might leave them to rise a little more, but I just don't have time.

The pastries start to go into the oven.

Pray and behave yourself.

However, varying bake times due to the different fillings

means that the bakers now face a very tricky, staggered and finely balanced last hurdle.

'I don't feel too confident at all.'

Janet's going for the classic French trinity, I think.

Looking at what she's doing currently with the pains au chocolat,

they're going to be from the Land of the Giants.

- They're going to be huge, aren't they?
- They'll be colossal.

I think all of them at the moment have come up with some great flavours.

Some, for me, I'm more attracted to than others,

- but it's all about baking now. That's the crucial bit.
- Yeah.

Getting better done the other way round.

I'm just hoping they're cooked all the way through because that's been my major issue with them at home.

That one's unravelled. That's not good.

Just give them a couple of minutes more, you know.

Don't want them to say, "Mm, doughy!"

Bit to go yet.

I'm not cutting it fine at all!

Obviously, when there's so many different components, there's sugar

in all of them, so you don't want to over-sweeten anything,

but then you don't want it to taste bland either. It's really... it's quite nerve racking.

OK, that's one minute remaining.

That's it. Done.

OK, that's time up. The baked French goods to the end of your benches, please. Thank you.

The semi-finalists have endured seven weeks and 21 demanding bakes.

Their fate now rests on the judging of this showstopper.

OK, Holly, you're up first.

They look so professional, all evenly brown. Don't they look lovely?

I think they look absolutely stunning.

I think they really do. The lamination on the Catherine wheel, it just hasn't done it inside.

You can see a couple of the layers where they haven't baked.

It's probably down to you. The oven's been slightly too hot.

The croissant especially is difficult to make with almond inside it.

You can see you've got a beautiful structure inside. These are really tricky to make properly.

Lovely. Really nice.

So buttery and light.

I like the apricot ones.

The apricot is strong. Each one of those

is beautifully neat. I should have been standing over you to learn how to do that.

- It really is beautiful. - There was a ruler involved.

- I saw it. - I missed out on that.

It was like a geometry lesson.

I kid you not, they are great specimens of pastries. Well done.

Well done, Holly.

So, Janet.

Gosh, that's a basket of bounty, isn't it?

I'm afraid, excessively large.

How many do these feed?

- A hungry person.
- The croissant is a poor shape.

- Yes, I know.
- The top of your triangle has to be about four or five inches.

The bottom, you can take down to 12 inches.

What you then do is roll it all up and that gives you the layers.

What's happened is that you've basically got quite a fat triangle and you've rolled it up

- and it's quite thick.
- Yeah, I didn't know how much one could handle the pastry, you know.

This one looks great. It's just massive.

Cutting your Catherine wheel, it's lovely and spongy.

I could have done with a little more fruit in here.

Did you over-cook your creme patissiere?

It was thick, spreadable.

- It's thickened up too much. Stodgy.
- Oh, sorry.

It's very difficult because it's bound to thicken up with the intensely hot oven.

The bake on those are OK. The lamination is fantastic.

The flavour's good on all of them. It's down to the shape.

- That is purely your downfall, the shape.
- Yeah, I know.
- Thanks very much.
- Thank you.

Well done, Janet.

Mary-Anne.

This is more the savoury style of things, savoury meets sweet.

They haven't quite cooked properly.

They're quite raw inside.

- Yeah.
- Which is a bit of a shame. This is the rose, isn't it?

Mm. Raspberry and rose.

The moment you get your nose there, it's roses.

- That's amazing how you got that through.
- Isn't it?
- And it's delicate as well.

- This is bacon, caramelised onion and goats' cheese?
- Yes.

- It's a nice idea. The flavours are great.
- Tastes good.

I am getting the crisp, it's just slightly underdone inside.

It's very sad about your sort of Catherine wheel.

- It's sort of come open.
- It's very difficult with that amount of paste,

though, to bind. It'll never do it in a million years,

because of the amount of filling. I mean, at the end of the day,

- it's down to the bake.
- Yeah.
- It's down to the finish

and the bake that was lacking on this one. Some of the flavours

that you got are unique and have worked,

- but it's down to the bake itself. Thanks very much.
- OK. Thank you.

Well done, well done.

I think they all look fantastic.

- Thank you.
- They just look so tempting.

And they're so lovely and shiny and polished, aren't they?

- I can tell you now, from the structure, they are fantastic.
- Oh, thank you.

The structure is absolutely spot-on.

It's crunchy, done just as brown underneath as it on top.

That pain aux raisins is delicious. You've got a crispy outside, golden brown, you've decorated it

with the jam, you spun some icing sugar on it as well.

And the texture, the flake inside,

is impressive.

- I'm gobsmacked. I really am. I think they're lovely.
- They really are very good, Jo.

- Well done.
- Thank you.
- Thanks, Jo.

- Thank you.
- Well done, Jo.

If I hear the words "I'm through", it'll be better than what Paul's just said to me

just now, with my bakes, and that was pretty awesome.

I just really hope that I'm now in for next week

and I hope that my mousse cake doesn't go too much against me.

So it wasn't the best feedback ever.

Could I have blown it at the last fence? Who knows? I don't know.

There's a time for everyone to go,

and for me in this competition, today might be that day.

Paul and Mary must now look back over the bakes to decide who will miss out on the grand final.

So, Paul and Mary, before you are the 12 clinchers to decide

who is going to go through to the final.

I mean, Jo, I thought her cake yesterday was very weak. It wasn't sweet enough.

Structurally it wasn't sound, and you look at

the iced bun challenge, she was second from bottom.

- But today...
- Just so good. She was the only one to get the pinwheel right.

Jo has created a miracle.

Only something of that quality could save her.

- And then Holly.
- This week, although her layered mousse cake was all right, it wasn't spectacular

and I'd certainly put it in second from bottom.

But, with her pastries today, I think she could be saved.

Where do you stand on Janet?

Janet yesterday, I quite liked her layered cake.

- She came bottom in the iced buns.
- She came bottom,

and again, today, she struggled a bit with the pastries.

They really are huge.

That croissant's more like a neck support.

It's a shame, because the flavour of the pastry is OK.

Mary-Anne yesterday, she did that very beautiful cake with the orange swirls on the top.

Mary-Anne, going from being the only in the position of safety

has jeopardised that because these weren't baked.

No, they're not baked. They're quite raw inside.

So Janet, who struggled over the weekend, and who's come up with something that needed to be better,

and Mary-Anne, who started high and then just dropped.

- OK. Well, we'll leave you to your deliberations.
- Go confer.

Firstly, congratulations, all four of you. Normally, at this point,

we'd announce a Star Baker, but the judges really feel that you all deserve

a special commendation and that no-one should be singled out because you are all semi-finalists.

So well done.

OK. Now, you know we can't take all four of you with us into next week's final.

So Paul and Mary have decided that the person not coming with us is...

Janet.

- That's fine. Can I just say, I've had a great time.
- Yay!

Thanks to everyone for your generosity, your kindness and everything.

You are brilliant.

I suppose, you know, everybody would want, if they entered the competition,

to get through to the final, but, you know, I've gone so much further than I ever dreamt I would.

I mean, my luck did run out today, quite obviously,

because my pastries were not up to the standard they expected.

You know, it has to be on merit, and clearly I didn't merit being in the final three, so...

and that's fair enough.

'I'm so chuffed to be in the final.'

I feel very emotional, but in a really nice way. Yeah.

I, I'm a little bit...

never lost for words, of course, being me, but I am a little bit.

It hasn't quite sunk in yet, that I managed to survive despite my baking efforts today,

but I'm not going to dwell on it because clean slate next week and everything to play for.

Oh, I really am

totally gobsmacked.

Sorry!

I can't, I really can't, honestly, truly believe it.

- Next time...
- Why is my hand shaking?

- It's the final.
- I've been feeling nauseous since yesterday.

I still think anyone could win it.

Holly, Jo and Mary-Anne must bake for a street party.

- You seem very quiet. Is that focus?
- That's blind panic.

I think nerves are a really, really big issue.

Only perfection will do.

It's a huge disappointment.

Absolutely stunning. It's a perfect home bake.

It's the toughest decision Mary and Paul have faced.

They've really got to prove themselves.

Never has pastry been so scrutinised.

Who will be crowned the winner of the Great British Bake Off?

The winner is...

We've been baking for seven weeks now,

in our search to find Britain's finest amateur baker.

Our handpicked 12 have beaten, whisked, folded and, frankly, often wept,

and now we're down to our final three.

Will they rise under the heat of the judges' criticism,

or wilt like eggless sponges?

Well, it's all to play for and they will have to be at their very best if they want to emerge victorious.

It's the last week of the bake off and finalists Holly, Jo and Mary-Anne

face the three most gruelling challenges yet.

Pinch me, because I'm at the final!

I'd be kidding myself if I didn't say that I really do want to win.



There's no more next week. This is it.

At the end of these two days...

This is where it all goes wrong.

..one of these bakers...

Oh, good God!

I think nerves are a really, really big issue.

..Will be crowned the Great British Bake Off Champion 2011.

This actually has no flavour.

It's a classic! One of the best I've tasted.

In the final, you've managed to crack it.

Everything they've baked will be served up

in a special street party where the winner will be revealed.

And I am beyond measure delighted to announce

that the winner is...



Over the last seven weeks, the bakers have taken on everything

from biscuits, tarts, pies and pastries to cakes.

Only the best three have made it through to the final.

Jo's impressed the judges with her fantastic flavours

and consistency over the weeks.

- Nice flavours.
- Lovely thin pastry there.
- Sublime.

To be the finalist of the Great British Bake Off is a real big feat.

It'd be like having all your Christmases and birthdays in one,

to win this. It would be really amazing.

Holly has proved to be a master of meticulous presentation.

Thanks to her constant practise, she's scored highly most weeks.

I think they look stunning.

It's delicious, absolutely delicious.

Thank you.

Every week I've wanted to go to the next week - it's a competition,

you wouldn't do it unless you wanted to keep going,

and I'm in the finals, so I am happy!

Mary-Anne has earned her place in the final with her technical knowledge

and constant desire to experiment.

- I adore the way it looks.
- Thank you.
- It tastes absolutely divine.

I want me to win!

We'll have none of this sort of shy, retiring wallflower -

it's the final, there's no point being here unless you want to win.

Good morning, bakers,

and a hearty welcome to the final of The Great British Bake Off.

To be crowned champion,

you are going to need to bake like you have never baked before.

You're going to start off, of course, with your signature bake,

and we're asking you today, please, to make 12 millefeuille.

Each slice should contain three layers of pastry,

and two of filling.

Now, you can fill it with a flavouring of your choice,

and you can also decorate it in any manner you see fit.

Go mad, freestyle, but remember it's the final,

so nothing too off-piste.

OK, you've got 2.5 hours.

- On your marks, get set...
- Bake!

This is the bake off final, these people are the cream of the crop.

We expect them to rise to the occasion.

It's all about pushing the boundaries.

Now we've got to see absolute perfection.

They've really got to prove themselves,

and I'm afraid we're going to be very, very tough.

A millefeuille is a tower of three pastry layers sandwiched with cream.

It can be made with either rough puff or flaky pastry.

Mary-Anne and Jo are working with rough puff,

where small chunks of butter are added to the mixture.

I haven't impressed with pastry in the competition so far,

and I haven't made rough puff pastry since I was at school.

Holly is making flaky pastry

by delicately dotting small pieces of butter onto her rolled-out dough.

I'm doing a real shortcut which doesn't involve

anywhere near as much resting as you probably should do,

but, you know, we don't have the time.

So, it's rough puff?

Rough puff.

For her signature bake, Jo has spent weeks

perfecting a raspberry and blueberry millefeuille

with an orange zest-infused cream filling.

Visually, it's got to look good.

- You know me, I like my pretty colours.
- You've thought about this.

It's the final, so I think you're pushing the boat out.

At home, you do a new recipe and you don't think anything of it,

- but here, your nerves kick in a little bit.
- How many times have you made it at home, Jo?

- Not more than ten, but quite a few times.
- She sleeps by the oven!

- Yeah, I can imagine.
- She does, she curls up, sleeps by the oven.

I got married when I was 17, then we had our three sons.

And then, literally, I've been a mum and a wife since then.

Then the bake off came along,

and it's the first thing that I've ever done totally for me.

She's never really been able to shine.

She's never been able to do something for herself - she's always just been our mum.

She's always been there, cooked our dinners.

- You've had a bacon sandwich already.
- Now she's showing what she can do.

- So, what have you got to do in the final?
- That cream slice,

they're called millefeuille, or something, and I've got to do those.

She's a lot more confident than she was when she first started,

and she'll tell herself she can win.

I rate the achievement of being in the final to be a massive,

massive thing in my life.

Obviously, my most proudest achievement is my three boys,

but it is fantastic.

Jo's going for the raspberry coulis.

Some lovely flavours there, you seem to be quite pleased with those.

Basic flavours, but we're looking for the big three -

presentation, flavour, and then a good lamination in that puff itself.

All of them, they are very limited for time.

We've rushed them.

After all, this is the final.

Getting those crisp layers visible on the outside

is the main thing to go for,

so that's what we're going for.

Mary-Anne is filling hers with a ginger cream rippled with homemade lemon curd,

and topping them with traditional icing.

I'm going to puree some of the stem ginger

and fold that through.

Then I'll make a lemon curd and fold that through, so it's like a ripple.

And on the top you're going to do feathering?

I'm going to melt some fondant, and then do lines of yellow icing,

and then with a toothpick, just feather it,

so it has a nice pattern.

- Nice and subtle.
- Yes.

You make me very happy, Mary-Anne!

Mary Anne regularly bakes with her daughter.

The bake off has given her the chance to showcase her knowledge

and expand her already massive repertoire.

When I told people I'd actually got through to the final

they were really supportive and said, "We knew you could do it."

I've got cards and messages.

My husband's really pleased for me as he knows it means a lot to me.

It sounds corny, but just being in the final is really good,

and if anything else comes of that, it'll just be the cherry on the top.

Mary-Anne's competitive with herself as much as with anybody else,

so on a scale of one to ten she'd be an 11.

To get to the final, and to win it,

she would feel really proud of herself, and I feel really proud for her as well.

My daughter knows I'm in a competition

and she's been saying that she misses me.

I've told her that it all comes down to this weekend.

My dream scenario would be to finish in half the time and sit on my chair with a cup of coffee,

watching the other two flap around.

I don't think that's going to happen but you never know!

Mary-Anne, she's making the lemon and ginger millefeuille.

We know that some of her things have turned out on the rustic side.

She's promised to go dainty again, so that's a good thing.

It's not a lot of time to make 12 millefeuille, so I'm worried,

but I'm not as worried as I was on Friday

when I had a meltdown in my kitchen, and ended up crying.

Holly's millefeuille is layers of flaky pastry

sandwiched with fresh cream, caramel, and her special ingredient.

Quite different. I've never heard of banana liqueur, have you?

- Have you heard of it?
- Yeah, I have.

- Quite hard to get hold of.
- Yes.

I've had it in Florence Station in Italy. Yes, it was a long night.

- European!
- Yeah.

I notice that you've put vinegar into your pastry.

I sometimes use lemon juice, but not vinegar, because of the flavour.

I don't think you get it through. Because of the volume of pastry,

it's two teaspoons in there - it's not a lot.

- I've got used to doing it.
- It's for the breakdown -

to get the crumb - it starts to break down the gluten in the flour

- because it's an acid.
- Oh, OK.
- That's the only reason behind it.

- Don't have a breakdown, though.
- I won't.

Holly manages to juggle caring for her two young boys

with hours of obsessive baking practise.

Practise makes perfect. I've never been able to wing it at anything.

Holly doesn't do things by halves.

She fully committed to the bake off when she entered.

Yeah, she has been practising an awful lot.

She does her homework, she'll read the books,

I know that she's read Mary's bible.

Holly will keep doing something until she gets it right,

even if it means she doesn't get any sleep.

She'll just keep going - she's like the Duracell bunny.

'It's about creativity and about perfectionism, you know.'

It's just got to look so appetising,

and I think this is really precise stuff.

I'm actually more frightened than people think.

So Mary, Holly's millefeuille?

Yes, Holly has added vinegar to her pastry.

Now we had a problem when Mary-Anne added it into the pastry,

- she was a bit heavy-handed, we could taste it in the final result.
- Yes.

- We'll wait and see, won't we?
- There's no room for error at this stage.

I'm a little bit stressed to be truthful.

The oven's cut off!

Oh, good God!

OK, we're halfway through. Halfway through.

Why is my hand shaking?

No, I'm going to have to do those again now.

I was too busy watching something else and I burnt my hazelnuts

cos I've got so many things on the go that I sort of,

you've only got to not watch something for a minute and then it goes!

Time's a real problem today. It's a nightmare,

this is not something you try and attempt as an amateur.

I'm sure a professional could,

but we're not professionals.

These are still a bit warm for icing. I'm dithering.

Just five minutes in the freezer, I think,

cos I don't want to...

Argh do...can't, can't decide!

I'm not happy with how they look

so I'm going to do a praline,

blend it up to put over the top cos I think it'll look much nicer,

but obviously I'm never really made praline before.

Praline is a combination of nuts and caramelised sugar that is then crumbled or ground

to make a crunchy topping,

making the caramel is not as straightforward as it seems.

I think that's the way to do it.

I've never made it before.

To prevent caramel from crystallising it must not be stirred.

Oh, plonker!

There's so much going on all at once

and it's a real big juggling act, this is.

Yeah it's quite difficult to keep everything going.

It's going to be really heavy going for this hour.

I think nerves are a really, really big issue.

The most difficult part is getting the pastry right,

because this is the decoration. Yes, it needs to look pretty,

but if the pastry's not right it'll taste awful.

Too dark.

I'm going to save some nuts and I'm going to do it again, just in case,

because I don't actually know if that's too burnt or not.

There's a new caramel being made every 30 seconds.

Yeah, my nerves are very, very fraught.

That's half an hour left, bakers,

just half an hour remaining, thank you.

No, it's all going!

It's 15 minutes remaining on this challenge, bakers.

No way!

It's obviously all about balance and, you know, they're so delicate

that you have to be really careful as you're piping in because,

yeah, it's really, it's going to be quite tricky, I think.

Three minutes remaining, bakers. Three minutes on this challenge.

Oh, raspberries.

OK, that's time up for the most multi-layered,

this millefeuille of stress is over.

So, cakes to the end of the benches, please.

Considering the time I literally didn't think I was going to get them all done,

so, yeah, I'm pleased with how they look.

The great piping disaster of 2011.

Its got the yellow decoration but no feathering,

so I was a bit disappointed.

I'm quite pleased I got them finished in the time,

I had one minute to spare.

At least I finished them, and they look OK.

Never has pastry been so scrutinised.

It's quite tough puff pastry.

I can't taste the vinegar, I was looking for it.

You know, we've got to seek perfection here.

No, I know.

It's quite tough.

- Right.
- Normally with a knife you'd go through it, it'll crack.

Yeah, right.

- What you've done is essentially kneaded the puff...
- Right.
- It's built up the gluten.

You could have overdone it, but the flavours are lovely.

I really like the flavours, the neatness, the bake's good.

I think the ratio of filling and pastry is not quite right.

I think the pastry should have been rolled out more thinly,

but the whole finish is absolutely beautiful, it tastes wonderful.

Well done, Holly.

Thank you.

They look sort of friendly and homely.

Ended up having to make a praline

which I've never actually made before,

so I sort of, was a bit rushed doing that.

They taste really, really good and your pastry,

I love the buttery flavour coming through.

It would be not nearly as nice without the praline, would it?

No, excellent mistake!

It crumbles, actually, and it cracks which is nice.

Take more care on your piping with the cream.

Appearance-wise, it does need some work.

- Well done.
- Thank you.

Bit of a problem with the bake on some of these?

- I think they could have done with a couple of minutes more.
- Yeah.

There. It's just not baked long enough.

Now you've done feathering on the top?

I tried to, we had a bit of a disaster, the piping bag burst.

- It was pure bad luck that, wasn't it, Mary-Anne?
- Yeah.

I like the filling a lot.

Good.

Why do I like it?

It is on the sharp side,

but cos the fondant is very sweet on the top, very sweet,

and there's an awful lot of it, the two complement each other deliciously.

I don't like the filling.

Oh.

For me it's too bitter.

For a millefeuille it should be, for me, sweeter and creamier.

The pastry is under-baked and that spoils it for me.

Yeah.

That's the way things go.

I mean I can't, I don't want to dwell on it

because I don't want it to affect how I do in the technical bake,

so I appreciate that there are lessons learnt,

should have maybe had the oven higher,

but can't go back, so onward and upward.

The judges are scrutinising them a lot more than at the start,

they're literally getting down at eye level, checking everything, and so they should do,

at this stage they kind of want to get it right.

I feel quite positive going into the next round.

I don't think I had too much of a bad round really,

considering, you know, I really was under pressure with the praline.

I feel happy and I'm excited about the next challenge cos I actually quite like the technical bakes.

I like a surprise.

The time has come for the bakers

to take on their final technical challenge.

With everything to play for, their performance will be critical

if they want to stand a chance of being crowned bake off champion.

OK, ladies,

it's time to take cover now,

it is the much-feared surprise technical challenge.

As you all know by now this is judged blind,

so Mary and Paul, please vacate the tent area.

Off they go.

So our technical challenge today is our hardest yet.

Of course, it's the final.

It is the sachertorte.

Now this Austrian speciality is no mean feat.

You've got a really dense torte on top,

you need to get a nice, shiny slick of chocolate ganache,

and also, if that wasn't hard enough,

the recipe details we've given you are deliberate sparse and basic.

They're also in Austrian.

- Yeah.
- No they're not!

You've got two hours and 40 minutes to complete this challenge, ladies.

We know you're up to the task, all that remains to say is...

on your marks,

- get set...
- Bake!

I don't know what I'm doing, so it's not very good in the final is it really?

It'll be quite a hard challenge and I haven't actually made one of these before,

but I've made ganache and I have made a torte before,

so we'll see how it goes.

I haven't made a sachertorte before, but I've seen a picture,

how hard could it be?

So Paul, this is the sachertorte.

I think it's a great technical challenge. Yeah.

They've been given the ingredients from start to finish,

but not what to do with them.

Baking-wise we've given them no instructions,

not even how to line the tin or whatever,

we presented them with a tin so they have to line that carefully,

and we've given them a rough baking time.

The first challenge is to melt the chocolate correctly.

I usually melt chocolate in the microwave because

over water is slower.

To be honest I don't really know if there's a perfect way of doing it, but I do know

one - it has to be melted, and two - never add really, really super hot chocolate

to creamed butter and sugar, because if you do it melts the butter.

Made the mistake of walking away,

and so have to start again now,

but I've got a stopwatch

so I'm going to be checking it every 30 seconds this time, so...

hopefully we won't have a repeat of that.

The next stage is to combine the egg yolks with the chocolate.

I always try and add eggs in bit by bit otherwise it can curdle,

but, you know, I don't know if it's right or not,

but this is the way I'd do it at home, so...

Next the bakers whisk and mix the egg whites.

The trick is to keep them moist and flexible, so that along with the trapped air

they can help the cake to rise whilst keeping it light in texture.

The whole trick with this is to obviously get a really good,

see that's a really good stiff beat but if you over-whisk this,

it always says in the books it looks dry.

What they should do

is put about a third of the whisked egg whites in

and stir that in.

I'm just going to stir these in rather vigorously

to loosen the mixture up.

If they don't do it gently, they'll be losing volume all the time.

Well, you just have to do these cutting motions,

you don't want to lose the air.

I was going to say the only rising agent is the egg whites itself,

so they really do have to be careful folding in that last bit of egg white.

And they've got to do it until it's all one pale chocolate colour,

and if there are any flecks of egg white when we come to judge it,

we'll see those and it will give a rather rough finish.

It has to have a really flat top because you've obviously got to ice it

then write on it, so you don't want peaks.

That's about as flat as I can get it so that's going to go in now.

I'm just checking I put the flour in! I have!

There is just an hour left on the clock.

I'm going to go with that.

It's a bit cracked but some tortes have a bit of cracking on the top.

Oh, good God!

It's sunk a tiny bit since it came out of the oven,

which means it won't have a completely flat top.

The ganache presumably is there to hide the multitude of ills?

That's what I hope.

The bakers are instructed to use apricot jam

as a barrier between the cake and the icing,

which should help achieve a smooth, glossy finish.

I could use the jam as a way of covering up.

Breaking up a little bit, so I'm trying to glue it all down.

Next is the tricky topping... the ganache.

Now this is a fairly key stage, isn't it?

It is, this is where it all goes wrong.

You're meant to heat the cream

and then melt the chocolate in the cream.

So...

that's how it should work.

Famous last words!

Ganache is a glaze made of chocolate and cream.

It should have a silky-like texture, so that when poured on to the cake

it forms a perfectly flat and uniform layer.

See, this is the problem with my cake, is that

it has a little dip in the middle so we get a big pool of ganache.

As an eater I don't think that's a problem,

I think that's great, you get a massive bite of chocolate.

I'm happy with that but I think Mary would say, "You've messed with my recipe."

The traditional finish to a sachertorte

is the perfect icing of the word "sacher",

piped in milk chocolate on the top.

I'm feeling positively nauseous.

All you need to do is write six letters on a piece of the cake.

Yes.

You can do it.

Yes.

What you don't want is have a moment where you misspell.

Yeah. My daughter's called Sasha.

Well, you could misspell it

and you could say that it's an ode,

it's an ode to your daughter.

Bakers, you've got 15 minutes left.

Oh, that is lovely.

Oh, God, look at that!

I think it's one of those things where you just do it.

You just have to do it.

I'm going to stand back and let you go for it.

GASPS

You, you...

That's not...

That's your fault!

But it's no my fault! That's what you're feeling.

I'll do a swirl underneath, they'll never notice.

Do you know what?

I think that's beautiful, you just leave it as it is.

Good for you.

Ladies, you've got three minutes, three minutes.

Right...

Oh, I'm so rubbish at writing.

That's it.

Done.

Not great, child-like

but my handwriting is rubbish!

Well done, ladies.

The last technical challenge of the bake off is over.

It's time to bring out Paul and Mary so that the judging can commence.

As usual for the technical bake

Mary and Paul don't know whose cake is whose.

I think we have a problem with the spelling on that one, don't we?

- It's written in Austrian.
- Oh, right.
- Oh, well that explains all.

Old-fashioned Austrian.

- Shall we start from this side?
- Yeah.

The ganache could have been a bit thick but it has the right consistency,

and that cake looks pretty well done as well, doesn't it?

The cake looks very good.

Mmm...

Getting the apricot through, which is good.

I think it's a nice cake, that one.

- It's a nice cake, a little over-decorated.
- Yeah, it is.

Now this one, its got the nice ganache on this one.

Know what? I think that could have done with a bit longer bake.

There's a little mound at the very bottom here that isn't quite baked.

It's got more of a high mirror finish which is what you're looking for a sacher,

but there are bits of egg white floating through the mixture

and that's because it wasn't mixed in properly in the bowl.

That dips there, see?

There's a little ridge round the outside.

These two could both have done with just a little more,

five more minutes.

Well, we've had a jolly good taste and a jolly good look,

and in third place it's this one here.

Some of the egg white isn't mixed in really well,

it has a lovely shiny finish,

but it dips

and we've got a ridge round here,

but a lovely shiny icing.

In second place is this one.

Holly.

Overall it was a nice cake,

the dip was the problem with that one, but well done.

So obviously guess who's number one!

Well done. The cake of this one was the best.

A little over-decorated

but we're in for the taste

and that's why you came first.

Basically everyone's bakes were good but mine

was obviously slightly better,

so, yeah, it was excellent.

I thought mine looked OK, and I thought the handwriting looked OK,

so that was like where I think I excelled, not with the cake though!

I am really pleased for Jo

because she doesn't understand how good she is as a baker,

and it's nice for her to get recognition.

I still think anyone could win it.

It's the final day in this year's search for Britain's best amateur baker.

Today is the finale and they've got to do their very best

and they've got to impress us.

Yesterday Holly impressed with her banoffee-inspired millefeuille,

and Jo came first in the sachertorte challenge,

whilst Mary-Anne's bakes were both undercooked.

I think Holly and Jo are fairly level,

so it's Mary-Anne that's in the precarious position,

she really has to make something extremely special.

You know Mary-Anne is capable of going to great heights,

technically she is really brilliant.

This challenge marks the end of many weeks of competitive baking,

after which their efforts will be served to family and friends

at the Great British Bake Off street party.

It's going to become a pressure cooker for four hours,

and it's the one that really drives for it, and wants to win, will win.

Today it's up to them. May the very best one win.

Bakers, good morning, it's grand final day

this is your last showstopper challenge,

so what we'd like you to do

is to create a selection of contemporary petits fours.

Now ladies, the judges would like you please to present

three types of petit four, the first should include meringue,

the second sweet pastry,

and the third should be sponge-based.

They're not just looking for technical brilliance,

they're also looking for a really stunning visual presentation,

and they've given you a theme as well,

because it's the grand final,

which is British summertime.

And these will all be served at the bake off summer street party

and, most importantly, after four hours of baking

one of you will be crowned 2011's Great British Bake Off champion.

With that in mind, on your marks,

get set...

Bake.

Today they will be judged on their technical ability,

consistency of their bakes, delicious complementary flavours

and an original impressive summertime presentation.

Presentation is the key to this challenge,

but they must keep to the very best flavours,

so it's looking good and tasting good.

It's a bit worrying being this close,

I've been feeling nauseous since yesterday,

haven't had any breakfast, but I have caffeine so it's not all bad,

I'll just have to concentrate on what I'm doing,

and make sure that it's finesse is the watchword and not rustic.

Obviously the dream scenario would be to win, but you know what?

If I can do well and produce good things then that would be really good also.

It is really exciting, really exciting.

- What are you going to do?
- I've gone for things

that mean summer to me, one being Wimbledon,

and then I'm using the great British seaside as my inspiration,

because I love going to the seaside.

Holly is making strawberry and cream mousse meringues,

gooseberry and elderflower Bakewell tarts

and a Neapolitan ice cream sponges.

- Can you cope with all these things, will you be OK for time?
- There's a lot to do.

Mmm.

But I have timed it and I can do it.

Did you sleep, are you worried today?

Yesterday I was probably the most relaxed I've ever been, strangely.

I thought that would carry on today, but last night in bed my heart was racing.

I was thinking, "Stop it, why are you doing this to yourself?"

But you can't control your body, can you?

Obviously the nerves are there but I've tried to keep them down.

I'm just making my Victoria sandwich mixture, just an all-in-one method.

Jo is making mini Victoria sandwiches,

white chocolate and raspberry pistachio meringues

and mini banoffee pies.

I like the idea of this, I mean, it is a very British dish, the Victoria sponge certainly.

About three hours from potentially being crowned the winner

of this competition, how do you feel about that,

how does the prospect of winning feel?

Really, really unbelievable.

I can't even think that far, it makes me really nervous,

so I need to just focus on this and block that out.

If you think about it you might go into giggly Jo and giggly Jo might...

- Heart attack not-breathing Jo!
- Don't want that!

After my piping disasters yesterday, I'm showing no fear

and I'm doing piping in everything today,

just, I'm even going to pipe pastry, pipe fruit, pipe everything!

Mary-Anne is making summer fruit tarts,

strawberry and rhubarb cheesecakes

and blackcurrant meringues filled with everlasting syllabub.

This sounds spectacular, it really does.

Some flavours which are fantastic, I'd like to see how the elderflower works as well.

- You could win.
- I could.
- How do you feel?

Apprehensive,

I'm scared of winning, I think.

- Scared of winning? Why scared of winning?
- I don't know,

you'll be a winner then and everyone will be looking at you! And I'm so shy.

- They'll be looking at you anyway!
- Your name will ring for ever.

So let's start with Mary-Anne.

My only issue with Mary-Anne is sometimes

the ideas are great, the flavours sound great,

but she'll just fall at that last hurdle

when the overall appearance just doesn't hit the mark.

There's always a sense with her

they could turn out to be less petit four and more enorme four

because she does tend to create sort of quite vast spectacles.

- Yeah.
- Now what excites me about Holly's menu is the, the Napolitano.

She's got her beautiful little meringue,

she's got the little pastry,

but her layered Neapolitan ice cream could be too big.

Jo is doing a banoffee pie inspired tartlet,

so she's got the sweet crust, caramel she's glazing on the bottom, then this banana mousse.

I think that's very, very clever.

I like the idea of the caramel.

That banana mousse on the top,

oh, I'm really looking forward to that one.

Do you know they started today

all on an even keel, more or less,

and so they've got an awful lot to play for,

and they could rise or they could drop.

How's it going?

It's going OK. We're all up against it.

- Yeah.
- The time pressure, the finesse that's required and...

- Yeah.
- ..the amount of different things you're having to do.

The bakers put their meringues in the oven first

as they will need to be cooked for two hours at a very low heat.

The aim is to slowly evaporate most of the water but not before

it's dissolved the sugar to leave a crispy, sweet structure.

Well, it's more drying than cooking,

and you don't want them to brown at all,

just want them to dry out.

With three hours to go,

Holly is moving on to rolling out the all-butter vanilla pastry

for her Bakewell tarts.

When I first started doing this competition I really, really liked pastry,

so my theory on pastry was thick was good.

I now know thick is bad, so...

I have learnt a lot!

I'm just going to try and make sure that the edges are all really tidy

because the last time we made mini tarts I got marked down

because my edges weren't particularly tidy.

I chose them initially cos I thought they're nice and deep,

you can get some good taste of the creme patissiere inside,

but now I'm thinking, "Oh, they're deep, they might stick,

"they might not want to come out,"

so they've got a liberal coating of cooking spray,

so I'm trying not to press the pastry too hard into the flutes.

Lady finalists, we are halfway through your last ever show,

off she goes, show stopper challenge.

You've had two hours, you've got two hours to go.

Mary-Anne has a novel method for achieving

the stripy surround sponge for her mini cheesecakes.

First she spreads out a sheet of red joconde-decor paste.

Now we take an adhesive scraper from your local DIY shop...

This is made from red food colouring, egg whites,

icing sugar, butter and flour.

Now I'm going to put this in the freezer so it can freeze up.

Like a strawberry facial!

I'm going to put the cake batter over the top

and bake that.

The guests are waiting to try the bakers' petits fours.

Among them, a few familiar faces.

For me it would be between

Mary-Anne and Jo,

but I think Jo might just tip the scales.

I think the person to win is Holly. I've had my money on her.

I'm sure they're all worthy winners.

I'm basically assembling my Neapolitan ice cream squares.

Look at that!

That is like a beautiful hotel luxury mattress.

Look at that. It's the first pinstripe sponge I've seen.

You seem very quiet, is that focus?

- Blind panic, actually.
- You go into yourself when you blind panic?

Well, normally I'm panicking by myself in the kitchen, but...

- Yes, on this programme we like to have panic in full view.
- Yes.

OK, bakers, that's just half an hour remaining before judgement.

The chocolate is to form a barrier between the sort of creamy syllabub

and the dry meringue, and hopefully keep the meringue nice and crisp.

Just, just there, oh, stay.

Talking to myself again, Sue.

This has been a consistent feature.

Yes.

A lot of chitter chatter. There's a lot of...

That's what happens when there's boys in the house and men,

they just tend to ignore you, so I talk to myself and the dog.

Mary-Anne, Jo, Holly, you've got ten minutes left.

This is the culmination of eight busy weeks.

Get the passion out on the plates and await the judges.

Holly, in order to talk to you I'll have to be fairly mobile,

cos I've noticed as well as creating these extraordinary petits fours,

- you've pretty much run a marathon...
- Yeah.
- ..over the last 20 minutes.

I think I have.

I'm just going to have to get the bowl.

Over here!

Let's get fit with Holly!

I can't keep up and I haven't made petits fours.

Ladies, you've got three minutes for this, your final ever show stopper challenge.

(Oh, three minutes.)

OK, bakers, that's it, that's time up,

your bake off experience is over, you've done everything you can,

move your stuff to the end of your benches. Well done.

You all right, Mary-Anne?

Bomb site!

That is without question the most full on, intensive,

non-stop start to finish four hours of my life!

I'm pleased I went with what I did, actually.

I think I've shown enough skill, I've made jam.

Made a mousse.

Made Italian meringue butter cream.

Made brandy snaps. Made a ganache.

You know, really gone for it.

I do today believe in my bakes, I really do, actually.

I feel like I've really produced good stuff today.

I really hope they don't think I've gone over the top with my cake stand,

be disappointed if they're too mean!

So bakers,

well done.

You've completed your final show stoppers,

so it's time for the final judgement.

Holly, you're up first.

Holly has made strawberry and cream mousse meringues,

gooseberry and elderflower Bakewell tarts

and Neapolitan ice cream sponges.

That's a nice idea, it is a really nice idea, Holly.

The meringue is very good.

It's amazing.

It's got a nice chewiness to it. You know, that's delicious.

It melts really well, flavours and textures are good, the size is good.

Can we just turn that one upside down?

- Which one, this one?
- That one.

Yes, beautifully evenly baked.

That's good, the pastry is beautifully baked.

Have you got a jam layer?

I made gooseberry and elderflower jam.

- And on top of that you've got a frangipane?
- Yes.

Your frangipane has been lost.

Has it?

All you can taste is the jam.

So that moves us on to the ice cream which is the Neapolitan style sponge.

It's a nice idea.

I think it's a nice idea but I think it's really too big,

and I think that you've shown us lots of skills,

I love seeing that brandy snap, but it's totally lost,

you wouldn't recognise it has a brandy snap.

I find that a little disappointing.

It's a bit dry.

- Is it?
- Yeah.

If they were thinner, same amount of filling,

same amount of icing, would have been a lot better.

This actually has no flavour.

That's my biggest issue I think.

It's been overwhelmed by the butter cream on the top.

It's a lovely display, it's very original, you've thought it all out.

- Well done, Holly.
- Thank you.

Well done, Holly.

Jo has made mini Victoria sandwiches,

white chocolate and raspberry pistachio meringues

and mini banoffee pies.

Jo, what a lovely way to present cakes

for perhaps summer in the garden.

Don't those look inviting?

You're a good girl, you've got them all the right balance.

They match, don't they?

They do, because you've got the extra height,

what you've done is you've shrunk the size,

so overall the balance is the same.

Display, absolutely fantastic,

that would be seen in any five-star hotel in their afternoon tea area for sure.

Mmm.

It's a nice light bake, that gentle flavour

of the fruit, it doesn't kick you in the teeth.

Vitoria sponge is an absolute classic,

which is one of the best that I've tasted,

and it's rather nice to have it that size.

If I just move on to this meringue.

That really works, it dances on your tongue.

Those raspberries, once you break through the meringue

it hits your tongue, ding a ling a ling,

and sets off everything. That's amazing.

The meringue is cooked for the right time.

It's still got that nice chewiness to it,

and it's a nice surprise to find

decent-sized pieces of pistachio in it.

Yeah. Now the one actually I'm looking forward to is this one,

which is the banoffee-style tart.

It's a good bake.

You needed to work the dough a bit more so it's more stable.

Oh!

That's good, that.

That is superb.

They're very, very short

and you would have to serve those a bit chilled.

It's very, very soft and quite difficult to eat.

Yeah, I totally agree

but that's the only criticism of those three.

- Thank you so much.
- Well done, Jo.
- Thank you.

Mary-Anne has made strawberry and rhubarb cheesecakes,

summer fruit tarts

and blackcurrant meringues filled with everlasting syllabub.

Well, they certainly look "pick your own",

covered in beautiful English fruits.

But they look amazing, I love the idea of the fruits on the top of each one.

Shall we try this one first?

- That's delicious.
- Thank you.

It's not too sweet either. It's creamy and not too sweet.

It's a perfect home bake.

Thank you very much.

It's a bit of a hotel bake.

Well, do you know, we can do good things at home,

and then we come to this very nice, beautiful little tart.

- The pastry is actually rather thick.
- Yeah.

Just too much pastry, isn't it?

- It hasn't worked.
- No.

That's a bit of a shame that, actually.

And the creme patissiere,

I could have done with a bit more vanilla in it.

Mmm. Shall we try this one?

Mary-Anne, I like the way you didn't use food colouring,

you used freeze-dried blackcurrant powder

which has given it a lovely colour.

What's in that syllabub?

It's a sweet dessert wine and brandy.

It's too alcoholic.

You need to burn that off before you use it inside of cream.

It's destroyed any flavour that you wanted to achieve in that.

It's a huge disappointment to me.

I think it's absolutely lovely,

and the pure alcohol is doing me a lot of good!

I think that's really lovely.

I couldn't disagree more strongly with Mary in my life,

because I think the interior of that is revolting to me.

I just don't get it at all.

I'll have a bit more to disagree again.

Easy Mary, remember what the doctor said!

But the whole presentation is absolutely stunning.

- Well done.
- Thank you.

Thank you, well done.

As Paul and Mary deliberate,

our finalists take their bakes to share with past bakers, family and friends

at the Great British Bake off street party.

Excuse me, Mr Hollywood,

"revolting" for a syllabub?

And he said that you couldn't have that amount of alcohol in it.

It's a 500-year-old recipe and I don't think a revolting recipe

would last that long if it was revolting.

I would hope they're going to look at yesterday

and also look at every week, you know,

that would be the right thing to do, but I don't know.

I just had no nerves at all today, I just, honestly and truly

thoroughly enjoyed every single moment of it.

Now it's fair to say we've got three really worthy finalists, but going into this final challenge,

Mary-Anne needed to do something extraordinary.

Everything in the right proportion

but the flavours weren't quite there.

And you have said to her pretty much every bake off,

"make it dainty, make it dainty", and she did.

She did, she nailed it.

She came up with the goods.

- Unfortunately she lacked that finesse to finish it off with the flavour as well.
- Yeah.

She's a rough diamond.

She's very good at what she does,

she just needs honing down and we'd have a fantastic baker.

Yesterday we were in a situation where both Holly and Jo

were pretty much neck and neck.

Yeah, for me, when I look at Holly I see technically the ability,

she is so precise, for instance,

you only have to look at that meringue nest to realise she's done the peaks,

every one of those would be perfect.

When you look at macaroons, if you remember, she did the lollipops...

Yeah.

The lines round the lollipops,

the display was so good.

We come to the tart, and that little tart was fine.

The flavouring of the elderflower and the gooseberries, you know,

all very summertime which is what we were after,

but it absolutely drowned

the flavour of the almonds,

and it just didn't really work.

And then we come to Jo who hasn't always been particularly meticulous,

but what she sometimes lacks in the consistency of the aesthetic

she makes up for in these big flavours.

The meringue was great,

the raspberry inside, the freeze-dried raspberry,

when you hit that, the dryness of the raspberry in the meringue hasn't hit the moisture yet,

so as soon as it hits your tongue, bam, bam, bam, bam,

leaping up and down, beautiful flavours.

She has been rather simple with her recipes.

She's not been too elaborate.

She's a really good home baker

who has advanced through every single session.

- Yeah.
- Where she falls down is technically she follows some recipes

and falls down at the last minute, and that includes profiteroles,

that includes some cakes she's...

- It wasn't her recipe, it was the actual structure!
- The tower, yeah!

Her flavours are always good,

what she lacks in sometimes is that little bit

of technical expertise and precision to actually come through with it,

whereas when you look at Holly she's been technically very good,

although sometimes she lacks that depth of flavour.

Yeah.

So between them you've gotta choose which particular skill you're going to go for.

I wouldn't want to be you.

I think very, very little separates them and I think,

the pair of you need to deliberate and look at the signature bakes,

the technical bakes, the show stoppers

and to come up with a worthy champion.

It is going to be extremely difficult.

After a long discussion, and taking into account eight weeks of baking,

Mary and Paul were in total agreement

over who should be crowned the Great British Bake Off champion.

Each of our finalists has beaten thousands of other amateur bakers to be here,

baked for over 60 hours in the marquee,

produced hundreds of pastries, biscuits and cakes,

and now finally one of them will be crowned

the Great British Bake Off champion.

Welcome to this, the final

of the Great British Bake Off 2011,

and can I start by asking our three lovely finalists

to take their walk of honour up to their places.

The finalists!

Holly, Jo and Mary-Anne.

Who-hoo! Yay!

Ladies and gentlemen, family, friends

and our 12 beloved bakers past and present,

I'm delighted to say that Paul and Mary have finally

reached a verdict,

and I am utterly beyond measure delighted to announce

that the winner

of the 2011 Great British Bake Off

is...

Jo!

I knew it!

Well done.

- It couldn't have happened to a nicer person.
- Thank you.

Jo's an excellent winner. She produces beautiful food, beautiful looking, beautiful tasting,

and hopefully she will start to get the hint she is a very good baker.

It's been fun and it's been hard work in equal measures,

and I'm so glad that I wrote on that application form and that I...

You know, I so nearly didn't.

Jo out of everyone

had the furthest to go,

her progression in the whole bake off has just been superb,

and when it came to the final,

the flavour of that banana mousse, it was just unbelievable.

Technical ability, and the precision,

and the flavour all thrown in. Fantastic.

She got better and better and she made the three bakes,

they all looked so pretty and polished,

but the most important thing of all, each one tasted absolutely superb.

She has achieved great heights, the winner,

I hope she's chuffed to bits.

Oh! Mmm. I feel really, really emotional at the moment.

I really, just feel totally overwhelmed.

Total delight.

I do feel really proud, really, really proud of myself.

You did it!

The Great British Bake Off this year saw the best amateur bakers in the country battle it out

to be crowned Bake Off Champion.

Along the way we saw them tackle pastries, cakes, pies,

biscuits, patisserie and bread.

It's not proved enough and it's not baked enough.

But now it's our turn.

This time expert judges Mary Berry and I take over the Bake Off tent

to do some baking ourselves.

Coming up,

Mary Berry takes on a traditional British cake, the Battenberg,

a complicated layered-sponge construction held together



with buttercream and wrapped in perfectly smooth marzipan.

Mary's recipe for tarte au citron, the classic French tart,

perfect sweet, thin, crisp pastry

with a deliciously sharp lemon filling.

My take on the traditional Italian flatbread, focaccia,

with its tricky wet dough and aerated crumb structure.

And finally, Mary's brandy snaps, the seemingly simple treat

that requires precision and perfect timing

to achieve its signature shape and snap.

We will show you some tips and tricks that will help you to create something magical.

From the mixing, to the baking, to the finishing, to the presentation.

At home, you will get the same results.

Each week the bakers in the great British Bake Off

face three challenges set by Mary and I.



And the one that always spread fear through the tent

was the technical challenge.

It was specifically designed to test the bakers' knowledge, intuition and skill

in the context of a classic recipe.

It's delicious, absolutely delicious.

The first round of the competition this year kicked off

with a weekend devoted to cakes.

The technical bake is a controlled test

of both your intuition and your ability.

What you are going to be creating is the bete noire of bakers.

It's a Battenberg cake. Not just any old Battenberg cake

but a coffee and walnut Battenberg cake.

So, Mary, you chose Battenberg as the first technical challenge

in the Bake Off this year. Why?

It's a classic. It's a cake that everybody knows

and it has many tricky stages.

They had to be able to make basic sponge,

but they'd got to do it in two varieties,

they had to cut it, shape it,

and you've got to get that chequerboard effect,

and that's difficult.

Usually it's pink and vanilla.

- That's right.
- I thought we could make it a little more sophisticated and have it with walnuts and coffee.

- There's lots of pitfalls in this particular recipe.
- Oh, there are!

I think none more so in the fact of

making sure that the squares are absolutely equal.

Cos for me, a Battenberg is all about the size of those squares,

the way they're shaped out, and essentially, a Battenberg is square.

That's why I chose it.

So, where do we start when we're making a Battenberg?

Well, we start off by lining the tin.

I'm going to use a tin that a lot of people will have at home,

and that is a square tin, about 7 or 8 inches.

Or for sheer luxury, and you really like to make them often,

- you can have a tin like this one.
- Oh, that's not fair is it!

No, but if everybody likes them and wants to make them often

- these have...
- They're brilliant! These come out?
- Yes.
- And you'll have a neat rectangle of sponge.

These all come out and then of course you could use it for flapjacks.

- I'm going to show you how you can divide the tin in half.
- OK.

Because I want to put my vanilla this side,

- and the other side I'm going to put the walnut and coffee.
- Yeah.

I need a division and I don't want the two mixtures

to run into each other.

'Before lining your tin, grease it well with some softened butter.'

Don't do it with oil because if you do it with oil it would slip.

'Take a piece of foil-lined baking parchment,

'which is a little bigger than the tin,

'fold it in the middle to create a divide.

'Then place it in the tin

'making sure the divide is at least the height of the tin

'and in the centre.'

Press it right down into those corners

- and then over the top like that.
- Yes.

- So that's ready. Now I need to make the Battenberg.
- OK.

- Now the sponge method you're using for this.
- Mm-hm.

All-in-one or creaming the butter and the sugar, adding the eggs?

I'm, because I'm very busy,

and I want a really good result, I'm going to use the all-in-one method.

So you reckon that all-in-one method as a sponge is better than

the creaming method with the butter and the sugar?

I do, I get a better result from it, and it is far easier.

I'll just put a little dusting in there.

You could weigh the 100 grams of self-raising flour in there.

- Mm-hm.
- Then put the baking spread on the top.

Add the marg on the top. OK.

Right. I mean, to make cakes, and this programme's all about baking,

it is weighing accurately,

so we'll start off by putting 100 grams of self-raising flour in there.

That's four ounces, that's right.

There you go.

And then 100 grams baking spread. So that is exactly 200 in there.

That's exactly 100 of each.

- And because you've floured the bowl...
- Yes.
- It slips off easily.

- Yes.
- Then we want 50 grams of ground almonds.
- 50 grams of ground almonds.

Putting ground almonds in this helps with the keeping quality.

- Yeah.
- I don't think it'll keep very long because it's going to be eaten.

- Right, so we've got almonds, we need sugar.
- Sugar.

- Castor sugar and 100 grams.
- 100 grams of castor sugar.

- That's right.
- OK.
- And we need baking powder now.

You may think using self-raising flour and baking powder...

- And baking powder. We've spoken about this before.
- I know.

The old-fashioned creaming method you used to beat until it was light and fluffy.

Because we're just beating it, not a lot,

I want a little bit extra rise in this

- and I'm going to add half a teaspoon just like that.
- Yes.

- So just a little.
- OK.

- To make that extra rise.
- OK.

- Eggs, two, please.
- Eggs, two, whole?

- Whole, yes.
- Whole, straight in.
- No need to separate them this time.

I think that's... If I do that, it drips all down the side.

I bet you can do 100 an hour or...

- Two, two, two.
- Two?
- Many of my mixes take 50 eggs.

- Do they?
- So we just stand there, cracking eggs.
- I won't compete.

Right, so at that stage, just beat it together.

And you only need to mix this until it is smooth,

and you don't go on and on and on beating it

when it's the all-in-one method, just when it's all together.

I feel like a five-year-old,

standing next to my mum when she's making a cake.

That's all right. I'll let you lick the bowl, then.

I'm going to divide that in half because I want one vanilla half.

Yes.

- And one...
- Walnut and coffee.

- Exactly, that's it.
- OK.

'To finish this sophisticated Battenberg mix,

'add one-and-a-half teaspoonfuls of milk

'and a few drops of vanilla extract to one bowl.'

'In the other, put 25 grams of chopped walnuts

'and 1 teaspoons of instant coffee granules

'mixed with one-and-a-half teaspoons of milk.

'This is what gives it a lovely colour and flavour.'

- Now we have to fill the tins.
- OK.

It smells lovely, the coffee flavour, doesn't it?

- Coffee and walnut is a marriage made in heaven as far as I'm concerned.
- It's lovely.

I'm going to level it right to the corners,

it won't take its own shape by itself.

And I'm straightening up the middle,

- and this is what some of our bakers forgot to do, keep this level.
- Yes.

Once the mixtures are level,

sponges should be baked for about 25 minutes

at 160 degrees centigrade or 140 fan.

Keeping their mixtures level was the least of the bakers' problems.

All were relying on their own experience of cake making

to decide how to execute the baking,

cutting and building of this unique cake.

I've never, ever made a Battenberg before,

so I'm quite a bit anxious, really, but hopefully it'll be all OK.

The first stumbling block was lining the tin,

and Janet was already beginning to flap.

It's a sort of new challenge, it's not something I've done before.

Holly was relying on her origami skills to see her through.

I don't really know what I'm doing,

I've done a bit of a Blue Peter job on the tin

and it's going to be a big element of crossing my fingers.

So I put all the coffee in the cake instead of half in the cake

and half for the icing.

I don't know, probably have a stronger flavour.

The judges wanted strong flavour, so hey, I'm sure they'll like it.

I think having a military background helps to some extent,

following specific things to do,

it makes up for the fact I'm a man, and multi tasking is a nightmare.

Ben's method of checking whether the sponge was baked was spot on.

It's as done as I can make it, we'll wait and see what happens with it.

I'm a bit worried that the foil is...

Oh, so did you use the rigid foil?

Well, the rigid foil is fine, it's the edges that have started to...

- flick in a bit.
- So you're... OK.

I'm a little bit disappointed, actually.

My foil's curled over so it's split away from the side,

but hopefully I can rescue that with some marzipan.

I'll have to trim it up nicely.

One side's wider than the other side.

So this has been brought out of the oven now and has been cooled.

They look fantastic, so equal. What are you looking for?

Well, I'm looking for them both to be of equal size.

- It's shrinking away from the sides there.
- Yeah.

That'll tell me it's done, and also the plain side,

the vanilla side, is that lovely pale golden colour.

- And then we cut it into two strips.
- OK.

'In order to start building the Battenberg,

'pull the ends of the baking parchment away from each other.

'Neaten up the edges of each sponge,

'and then divide both evenly into two strips.'

- Ideally, one should leave it half a day at least.
- Yeah.

Because then it cuts evenly. Then we come to the buttercream.

'Take 100 grams of icing sugar and 40 grams of butter at room temperature.'

We've got coffee granules over there, half a teaspoon, if we put those...

- In there?
- ..in there with 1 teaspoonfuls of milk.

There we are.

But I think the coffee icing really complements it

- and brings the whole thing together.
- Yeah.

Now if you'd like to tip your icing sugar and butter on top of that.

- Into there?
- Yeah.

Just going to break up that butter.

Then I'm going to get my hands in there.

- Hands?
- Yeah.

A true baker.

Just imagine it's dough and it'll be perfect.

I think there's something about using your hands in a bakery.

It's going to go into hyper speed in a minute, all right?

Looks lovely and smooth.

I think you get the feel for it,

and if you're permanently using a mixer you haven't got that link.

If you get your hands in there,

you remember what it should be like.

- If the phone rings, you use your other hand?
- Sometimes not.

'Assembling the Battenberg is the next stage.

'Use the buttercream to join one coffee strip

'and one vanilla strip together.

'Spread some icing across the top

'and create the square with the remaining two pieces of cake.'

Obviously, there's a slight drop on each side where it sits,

cos you get a natural rise in the middle of the oven.

Could you trim off the very ends?

You certainly could at this stage if you wanted to, but I like to do it at the very end.

Now we need 225 grams of marzipan, just making quite sure I haven't got any crumbs on my fingers

cos that would mark the... make it non-perfect.

Yes, the marzipan, yes. It's imperative at this stage to make sure the marzipan is clean,

so you don't get all those indentations and possible breaks in it.

So top tip is icing sugar on your rolling pin

- rather than on the marzipan at this stage.
- Exactly.

Just an even roll all the time, just like doing pastry.

I know a few of them had a problem with the marzipan on the Battenberg,

it did split, it did break,

and it looked a bit of a mess on a few of them, to be honest.

No, that didn't work.

It's rubbish.

I'm going to start again. Stupid thing.

Sorry.

I'm using cling wrap here

because I didn't want the marzipan to stick to the roller.

With some judicious encouragement, it can be persuaded to wrap round.

Is it going to match?

That'll be at the bottom so they won't see that bit!

'Once the marzipan is carefully rolled, place the assembled cake

'into the middle, spread the remaining buttercream over the top.

'Next, wrap the marzipan carefully around the sides of the cake

'and massage it gently to bind it to the sponge.

'Finally, trim off the edges to neaten both ends,

'creating the perfect chequerboard effect.'

- Do I ask a favour, can I crimp it on the top?
- You do the final finish.

Well, if I do a little crimp, I think it sets it off, doesn't it,

and it makes it look a little bit special.

So we need just a few walnuts on that.

I always think it's a good idea to have whatever's inside

showing on top so people know.

- How about doing five?
- OK.

So that's our Battenberg, quite a challenge for our 12 bakers.

When it came to judging, we were looking for the Battenberg that demonstrated the baking techniques,

flavours and precision demanded by this recipe.

This person has followed the recipe exactly.

- It's been really well pressed into shape.
- It looks very pretty.
- And businesslike.

Marzipan's very neat, that's nice.

- This has been well-trimmed, it looks perfection.
- It's good flavour, good bake.
- A very good execution.

And who has this one here?

This is a masterpiece.

Well done, Holly.

I've been dying to get a piece of this.

It looks very good.

As a technical challenge,

I thought the choice of the Battenberg, Mary, was superb.

Well, it was pushing them, and remember this was their first one,

perhaps we were a little bit cruel to put it in so early.

It was interesting when you talked to them,

they all knew Battenberg, but very few of them had made them.

It was tricky as the first technical challenge.

I think getting all the sponges exactly the same,

getting the good bake on the sponge itself in the first place,

the blending of the buttercream and the smoothing of the buttercream between the sponges,

ultimately, if they'd done that properly

they would have ended up with a Battenberg like this.

In the second round of the competition, we introduced pastry.

Over two days and three challenges, we tested the bakers to the limit.

The most difficult challenge of all was the second.

The moment the technical bake was revealed, a ripple of fear swept through the tent.

Deep breath, what we're going to be asking you to do

is a tarte au citron.

You know, Paul, tarte au citron, lemon tart,

is quite my most favourite dessert or pastry tart.

- Is that why you picked it for the technical challenge?
- Oh...

You wanted to make it cos you liked it?

Not really, because technically it's quite tricky to make,

and there's an awful lot that can go wrong with it.

But it is so good to eat, so popular,

yet I think people are nervous of making it at home.

So you're going to show us now the definitive lemon tart.

- Exactly.
- OK.

And so for that I'm going to make the pastry,

- I'm going to do it in the processor. So, 175 grams of flour.
- Yeah.

On the scales.

- Is that absolutely right?
- Nearly, getting there.

- That's 175 grams. OK.
- I'll put that into the processor.

- You can do this by hand, can't you?
- Oh, you can, yes, just put it straight into the bowl.

- Then we're going to add the icing sugar, 25 grams.
- 25 grams.

- I'm keeping a strong eye and you're up to 22 at the moment.
- I'm up to 24.

Oh, all right, and...

Don't start taking your position...

And these chefs, you know, they always use their hands.

There you go.

OK. So that is my 25 grams.

And 100 grams of cold butter. Now we put that in the fridge, didn't we?

Yes.

In there, there we are.

So at this stage you're just going to bind the ingredients to a breadcrumb consistency.

Exactly. Press the button to go.

- Can you see how it's changing now and becoming pale yellow?
- Yeah.

- And it's just rubbed in as if you'd done it by hand.
- Yeah.

But a lot quicker.

Do you know what's happening in a molecular level? Can I bore you with science?

The flour particles themselves are being coated with the fat from the butter or whatever fat you use,

and that actually prevents the liquid coming out

and too much gluten being formed.

So when you add the water, you then work it,

the more you work it, the more gluten is released through the fat

but it limits the amount of gluten allowed out

to stop it being too rubbery.

Very clever.

And add one egg yolk to that.

- There you go, one egg yolk straight in?
- That's it, and some water. A tablespoon.

Now, measuring spoons are an essential part of my life.

Everybody can make pastry if they weigh accurately,

so I'm going to keep an eye on that.

And when I see it coming together...

So that's your basic sweet pastry mix.

That is basic sweet pastry, and I use it for all sorts of things.

So it's interesting that you use icing sugar rather than castor sugar.

It makes a better dough. I think.

- Smoother dough, smooth.
- A smoother dough.

- Now you just knead that a little bit for me.
- Yeah.

Just knead it.

I only knead it a little bit. Now that is a skill I haven't got yet.

- Right, I've just got some non-stick parchment.
- Yeah.

And the size I'm going to make is 23 centimetres,

about an inch high,

and this is the way that I do it,

because I was taught to roll out the pastry into a big sheet

then put it round the rolling pin.

- The way I normally do it, yes.
- Well, so often, if you haven't made it perfectly, it cracks.

And so, this way, it doesn't.

So if you put that as your base, and you know you've got to make it sort of an inch bigger all round.

That's a nice tip.

Then you put that in the middle, and you roll it out.

And try to keep it round... round again here.

- It's just all about being gentle, isn't it? Just easing it out to the side.
- It's gentle, gentle.

But light hands - you notice I'm not pressing it and it's got to be fairly even.

- There, now you can actually see the circle...
- Yes.

- ..underneath.
- Clearly.
- That looks just about right to me.

Right, now how am I going to get it into there?

Very simply. What you do is you take the pastry

and you just turn it in like that... and you see,

if I tried to put that over the rolling pin...

it would more than likely crack.

Then you just take that and you put that in there, there it is,

and then very simply lift this over the side.

You notice that I've got lots of spare.

I'm going to leave that exactly there.

Usually, I don't chill it before I roll it out,

but if it's warm like today, you can chill it for five minutes.

It's a good idea, again, just to solidify the butter that's in there.

It makes it a little bit easier to work.

Firmly press the pastry into the grooves of the tin.

'Once it's lined, prick the base so it doesn't balloon up while baking,

line it with foil and some baking beans to weigh it down.

Bake the case for around ten minutes at 200 degrees centigrade,

180 fan, while you make the filling.

You will need the zest of four unwaxed lemons

and 150ml of lemon juice.

For the filling break five eggs into a bowl

and whisk together with 225 grams of caster sugar.

If you used granulated sugar, you would get speckles

on top of the tart.

Whisk until it becomes smooth, then add the zest and lemon juice

and mix again until they're well combined.

Finally, add 125ml of double cream.

It's time to check on the pastry case.

- There you go.
- That's it.

- Right, now, can you see that's got a gentle brown on the outside?
- Yes.

And then just lift it out... and you notice how it doesn't stick.

And you can see now that most of the pricking has filled up the holes.

- Yes.
- It looks underdone in the middle.
- Mmm.

And therefore, that has to go back in the oven

for 10 to 12 minutes until it dries out.

- So you're going to take that to its full bake before it goes back in with the filling?
- Exactly,

because remember when we were judging -

and we've got a thing about a soggy bottom -

you've got to get that bottom of the pastry really, really dry.

'The pastry needs another ten to 15 minutes

'until it is completely dried out.

'When the pastry case is fully baked, allow it to cool.

'To finish off the tart, transfer the filling to a jug

'and give it a quick stir to check the lemon zest is well mixed in.'

Now, most people, I expect, would pour that into there,

walk to the oven, and, with a not very steady hand,

it might go over the side and get between the pastry and the tin.

- Mmm.
- So, if you put that on the oven shelf...
- In the oven now?
- Yes.

..and then you just gently pour that in...

And as a matter of interest, that was exactly a pint.

- So, that's ready to bake?
- Yes, it's in the oven and the oven is set.

Overcook it,

and it might have bubbles in it,

- which would toughen it.
- Mmm.

And if you overcook it, a crack will form.

To know when it's done - and we'll have a look at it - it should have a wobble in the middle.

'Bake the tart at 160 centigrade, or 140 fan, for about 35 minutes.'

'I've always considered that the level of skill of a good pastry chef

'can be measured by their ability to make a perfect lemon tart.'

I'm scared that I'll mess it up big time if I still do that.

A lot of fear coming through.

It's making Mary's lemon tart for Mary.

'With only 1 hours on the clock,

'the bakers were up against it.

'There are no short cuts when making a perfect lemon tart.

'Janet's pastry looks slightly overworked.'

- Yes, it's looking a little bit gunky.
- What, the pastry?

Yes, but maybe it'll be OK.

I have done a tarte au citron in the past,

not with quite such a sticky pastry.

But we'll do with what we've got.

'It wasn't just making the pastry that was tricky.

'Blind baking was also causing problems.'

There's a little crack in the bottom of my case, you know.

Hopefully, it will do the job.

It's all in the pastry, the crunch, and it looks all right,

but God, who knows?

- Oh, no...
- Jo, are we facing the collapse of the pastry wall?

- Yes, hah, we are.
- OK.

I've never had it collapse on me or anything before,

but I'm making silly mistakes and I don't really know why.

I think wishy-washy lemon's not worth having, you know,

I think if you have something lemony, it's got to be really sharp.

So it sort of gets all your jaws going, you know.

'The technique of filling the cases whilst in the oven eluded some of the bakers.'

- Oh, no, this is terrible.
- Please, please!

'The bakers all had their own views when to take the tart out of the oven.'

Out you come...

You're supposed to take it out

when there's just a little wobble in the middle,

so I've applied that principle and, fingers crossed, it'll work.

I don't think it's a disaster,

it doesn't look like a disaster cos at least it's not runny.

When you're cooking something like this lemon tart, overcook it,

and it might have bubbles in it, which would toughen it,

and a crack will form.

That looks beautiful.

Then you want to leave it in the tin so that the pastry will shrink back from the outside.

If you try and turn it out now, it could well stick.

'Leave the tart in its tin for about ten to 15 minutes to cool.

'Carefully remove the tart from the tin, slide it off its base

'onto the serving plate, then dust liberally with icing sugar to serve.'

It really makes the most beautiful dessert, or even little wedges of it for tea.

I'm looking forward to that one, Mary.

'When it came to judging, while some looked impressive,

'others fell short with thick, burned crusts and cracked tops.'

Good gracious, 11 really lovely tarte au citrons.

'And when we cut and tasted them,

'I couldn't believe how different they were,

'considering they were all from the same recipe.'

It's a bit thick on the pastry.

- Tastes good, but you expect that, it's a Mary Berry recipe.
- THEY LAUGH

There's a crack in the top of this one, it is slightly over baked.

A thinner pastry on this one.

I think that the blind bake wasn't long enough.

- Mmm. And that's been boiled.
- Nice to have thin pastry, though.

This one looks like a patchwork quilt.

- You see the different colours.
- That's the join in the pastry.

This one looks good.

Thin crust, it is not shrinking away from the side,

the filling is beautifully creamy.

- Lemon tart, or as the French call it, tarte au citron.
- Cut a slice.
- Mmm.

- Was that going through like butter?
- It cuts extremely well.

Looking down the side of that, there isn't a bubble in the filling.

But most important of all is underneath,

the pastry should be very thin

and a lovely golden brown.

Mmm.

It's so delicate. Yet the beautiful lemon coming through.

It is a tricky thing to get a perfect lemon tart

and if it's baked properly,

that's exactly how it should be.

'Week three, and we decided it was time to test the bakers

'on their bread-making skills, my personal passion.'

Got too much salt in it.

Your technical recipe for this challenge is focaccia.

And to add a little bit of pressure,

you will be working with master baker Paul Hollywood's own recipe.

So Paul, out of all the breads you could have chosen,

why did you chose focaccia for a technical challenge for the bakers?

I chose the focaccia because it's extremely difficult to make. Cos this dough is extremely wet,

and the flour to water the ratio is nearly one to one,

so you can imagine, it's almost like a wet jelly

and very difficult to handle.

These are the best amateur bakers this country has to offer

and if I can't push THEM, what's the point?

But I'm going to show you how you can incorporate

that much water into a mix, so what we're going to do is

to start with some flour, some strong, white flour.

- Right.
- Now I'm going to weigh up 500 grams, all right?
- Right.

I'll keep an eye on you that it's absolutely accurate.

- You're on your way, two more grams.
- OK, 500.

Exactly right. And strong flour.

Strong, white bread flour.

This has a higher protein level, therefore a higher gluten level.

Gluten - glue,

the glue that binds the structure,

the holes in the loaf together, keeps it strong.

- Now, yeast.
- Yes.

Three different types of yeast here,

- you have what's called fast-action yeast.
- Usually in little packets.

Yes, or the powdered yeast, which you get in little sachets.

The middle one is a dried yeast.

This one you have to reconstitute with water, sugar,

mix it and then leave it for 15 minutes to froth and bubble.

- Load of nonsense, don't use it.
- Right.
- This particular yeast

- is the fresh stuff.
- Mmm.
- Fast-action yeast is the dried version of that. Therefore,

if you base that as a concentrate,

you use a third less in the powdered.

So it's fast-action dried yeast that we're to use.

Fast-action yeast, so I'm putting that straight in, two sachets of seven grams.

- Right.
- The next thing I'm going to do is add a glug of olive oil,

30ml, I need - one, two, three.

That might have been a bit too much, may it?

No, it's fine. Salt.

I'm using normal cooking salt. And I'm actually going to use ten grams.

If you're using measuring spoons, that would be a dessert spoon.

I'm not into all that stuff, that is bizarre.

I know, but WE like to be accurate and we have a little set of spoons.

- OK.
- You can do it...
- Is that the royal "we"?
- Us home bakers.

OK, so, in there, we have the core ingredients

to make the most magical food known to man. Or woman.

In this jug, I've got cool water,

- not warm water.
- Cool water?

- Just tap water, straight from the tap.
- Right.
- 400ml.

Straight into the bowl, start off about half way.

Because it takes so much water, this dough,

you never add the full amount straight away.

- More water in again.
- But you are going to include all that 400ml?

Oh, yes.

At this stage, I'm just turning it, to see how much liquid it's going to pick up.

And again it's still more.

But you gave them definite instructions that they had to

use all that 400ml of water, and they didn't believe your recipe.

They actually started to change the recipe

because they thought it was wrong.

'Making focaccia is a test of raw baking skill,

'where technique is important.

'But respecting the fluid to flour ratio in my wet dough recipe

'is absolutely vital.

'Making focaccia is a real test,

'most people have never worked with a dough so wet,

'and a lot of our bakers found it difficult to believe that the recipe was actually correct.'

I think this has been the scariest technical challenge so far,

because I've got no idea if I'm getting it right.

'Rob thought he understood the recipe, as he's very familiar with 'bread-making techniques.'

Have you made focaccia before?

- I've not, but I think I kind of know the theory of it.
- Which is?

Well, just that cos it's meant to have those cool little holes with the layers,

and the holes come from the wet of the dough.

'But the extra wet dough in my focaccia recipe caused plenty of confusion.'

This is baffling me, I've never made such a wet dough before.

I don't know how this is going to come together, but I'll give it a good go.

And now add the remaining water.

It doesn't say how to add it, but I'm just going to sort of, you know...

- Just whack it in there, mate.
- Strange.
- It is weird, isn't it?

It is weird... Oh, gosh.

'Ben was fighting the urge to deviate from the method.'

And the temptation is just to

put more flour into it to get to a dough that you're used to using,

and so you have to kind of go, "No, no flour, no flour."

- Have you got any more water to add?
- I've got about...

- just under 100 left.
- It's, I mean, it's up to you.

I'm kind of liking the way it's behaving at the moment.

'Jo seemed confident that my recipe was right.'

Obviously Paul knows what he's doing,

so hopefully this will turn out OK.

- It's actually coming together quite well.
- Yes, there you are...

- Looks very stretchy now.
- It's getting that way now.

What I'm going to try and do, is try and stretch it on some olive oil.

- So, plenty of olive oil on there.
- Right.

Now, the idea of the olive oil on the table is not to...

You don't want any more flour added to that mixture?

No, so I'm just stretching it... and placing it in the middle.

Kneading this is actually very difficult because it's so wet.

So what you're doing is stretching it

to try and build up the gluten in it, that's all I'm doing.

You can see it's starting to get quite smooth already, you know?

It's so good to see you doing this, because if I was at home doing that

without your demonstration, I would think that that was just a bit wet.

Well, look at the...

- it's not moving, it's not flowing out, it's quite a stable dough.
- Yes.

You see how smooth it's getting now.

No need to go to the gym when you do Paul Hollywood's bread, is there?

HE CHUCKLES

OK, at that stage, I'm going to put it in that glass bowl there -

can you pass me that glass bowl?

- Right.
- This is a two-litre glass container, OK?
- Right.

Olive oil just to stop the dough from sticking,

rub it all the way round the sides...

- and then place your dough in there. Flatten it down slightly.
- Mmm.

Then are you going to cover that or leave it open?

I'm actually going to cover it.

- The only reason why I'm covering it is to stop a skin.
- Yes.

The gluten that has been built up, it will activate the yeast,

the yeast will start to produce carbon dioxide,

and it will start to grow.

And you leave that to rise in kitchen temperature?

Kitchen temperature, living room temperature, bedroom temperature.

But not in... Putting it in a linen cupboard or above a radiator,

it just speeds up.

Absolutely not, do not speed up the rising process,

let nature do the work.

And it'll take about an hour for the focaccia to double in size.

Mary, can you pass me my bubbling mass of dough, please?

Looks like a volcanic eruption.

- There you are.
- If I just take this off carefully...
- Yes.
- Peel that off round there.

And it's right up like that because your dough was very wet to start with?

Very wet, it's got no resistance because the dough is not tight, so it will just...

it will just blow.

And when you put it in a container, there is only one place that dough can go - straight up.

Now, if you look at the structure of the dough down here and all down the side...

- Right.
- ..you see the structure.
- Masses of little holes.

There is masses of holes.

And that structure down there

is an indication of what your final bread will be like.

Now, if I lift this up gently,

see how stringy it is?

- It's all stretchy and stringy.
- That, there, is the gluten. Nature -

I've taken it to a level of kneading -

nature has done the rest.

Right, I will need two baking trays, please, Mary.

- Right, we've got some under here.
- Yes, down there.

Does that mean, this amount, the 500 grams, is going to make two?

- One big one, or two little ones.
- Right.
- OK?

Now, at the moment, that's just got blind baking parchment on there.

- Yes.
- Little bit of olive oil on the bottom, rub that in.
- Mmm.

- What I'm going to do first is tip this dough out onto an oiled surface.
- Right.

OK, there's your piece of dough.

OK, we'll stretch this out a bit.

- Can I have a feel of that?
- Yeah, course you can.

It's really, very, very, wet and stretchy,

every time you pull it out it comes back.

Just cutting the dough in half...

OK, what I'm going to do is lift this up as a blob, stretch it,

place it onto the tray.

OK? Now, you're going to do this one. Easy tiger,

wait, I'm going to put the rest of it in, OK?

What we need to do, just gently press down,

that down motion will naturally take it to the side, anyway.

- Shall I write my name on this one so I know it's mine?
- If you want to.

- I missed a bit there.
- Fantastic.

This is the skill of the bread maker - you've got it, Mary.

'Once in a tin, the dough needs to be left to rise again,

'uncovered, at room temperature, for about an hour.'

At this stage, would you add some rosemary or some olives or anything like that?

This is a stage where you'd add tomatoes on the top, cherry tomatoes.

Potatoes, sliced up on the top, absolutely delicious on there,

and again, you can add any herb you want to.

'To add moistness and flavour, drizzle a little more oil

'over the top and push your fingers in to create dimples.'

'It was entirely up to the bakers how long to prove for.'

Let me see yours.

If it hasn't risen, then I've just wasted an hour.

I'll be honest, I don't think it's number one, but you never know.

'As the bakers added the final touches to their focaccia,

'confidence in the bread was rising.

'Although Mary-Anne's dough was an odd shape, she seemed happy with it.'

It's a bit lopsided, but it'll do, it'll do...

..fingers crossed.

Now, what quality olive oil would you use to go on the loaf here?

Before bake, non virgin, after bake virgin olive oil.

So it's not so much the flavour, but you want that flavour afterwards,

cos afterwards, when it comes out of the oven, we put more olive oil on.

'Lightly dust your focaccia with a little sea salt

'and then bake in the oven for about 20 minutes at 220 degrees centigrade

'or 200 degrees in a fan oven.'

- Ooh, gosh, that looks good.
- You can smell it, can't you?

- I can see my fingerprints.
- Two. And I've got some olive oil here.
- Right.

- Some good olive oil.
- Right.
- Again, drizzle a little bit on top.

- And it needs nothing else.
- And that's how you make a focaccia -

it's simple, a bit stagy,

a bit fiddly, but this will be packed full of flavour.

I really can't wait to taste them, they look wonderful. This one's mine.

'When judging our bakers' focaccias,

'I had a very specific idea of exactly what I wanted to see.'

What I'm looking for is thin, not fat.

If you think a focaccia should be this big, you're mistaken.

That's the British version of the focaccia, not the Italian version.

This has got a crisper top and the aeration is uneven, as you like it to be.

Mmm, try this one, Mary.

Someone's not been following my recipe... There's too much flour in there.

Someone's thought, "Paul's made a mistake here.

"I don't think I'll add all the water."

I mean, you look at that strata, it's not irregular enough,

and it's quite dry, it shouldn't be like that.

- This one's a bit bready again.
- Has a nice crust though.
- Mmm.

- This one looks a bit better, see the strata on that one?
- It's...

These massive air holes, these huge things you hit every now and again are great.

That's one of the best ones I've seen for quite a while as well.

- Thank you.
- Well done.

So, this is focaccia,

and it WILL be good because it's Paul Hollywood.

Mary, can I offer you some?

I'll do the traditional break, there you go, there's some for you. Some for me.

Now, when you look at the actual structure,

it's quite an irregular crumb, big holes, little holes.

It's not regular. That's the crucial thing with a focaccia

and that is brought about by the sheer amount,

volume of water in that dough.

I think it was really difficult for the bakers

because when you go and buy focaccia, very often it is thick.

And I think that it was difficult for them to get the thin one like you're saying,

weren't quite sure what they were going to end up with.

- It's the texture, it's the look.
- Right.

And obviously olive oil, lots and lots of olive oil,

that's what gives you the flavour.

We've got very exciting things suggested that we have with it.

Parma ham and things, but I like it just as it is.

- It's absolutely beautiful.
- So you like it then, Mary?

- I don't like it, I absolutely love it.
- Mmm.

- And I think this would be my perfect lunch.
- Delicious.

- And, of course, a glass of wine.
- Oh, of course... Cheers, Mary.

'With only eight remaining in the competition,

'week four of the Great British Bake Off

'was all about creating the perfect biscuit.

'The technical bake was Mary's brandy snaps recipe.

'Tasty and brittle, the success of a brandy snap lies in its name, the snap.'

What we'd like you to do

is to make 24...brandy snaps.

We need them to be of equal colour, size,

and we'd like them filled with whipped cream.

So, Mary, brandy snaps, chosen for a technical challenge. Tricky?

It's quite tricky, as our bakers found.

And you've got to make it to the right consistency,

you've got to get the sugar dissolved

and you've got to space them properly on the tray.

Quite tricky, but fun to do.

The recipe itself is immensely simple and easy to remember.

- So if you take 50 grams of butter.
- Yes.

Next is sugar, Demerara sugar

and if you can spread that over the top evenly

when we put the golden syrup on top,

it won't stick to the pan.

- That's it.
- OK.

And then the golden syrup on the top, again 50 grams.

50 grams of golden syrup.

In ounces, it's two ounces of all three things.

Almost there...exactly.

So we then put that onto the hot plate like that

and it's very important to dissolve this very slowly

because if you don't, it will crystallise

and then it crystallises and it holds in one piece.

But you've got to get rid of the grittiness

and that's just melting the sugar so it really is on a low heat

and keep an eye on it.

And when you no longer have any grittiness at the bottom,

then you know that it's done.

'It will take about ten to 15 minutes to get the right consistency,

'which should be smooth and glossy.

'Take it off the heat and allow it to cool

'for a few minutes before adding the remaining ingredients.'

So that's 50 grams of flour, if you can weigh that up.

50 grams of plain flour.

That's exactly right, then we're going to add

half a teaspoonful of ginger, so that goes in like that.

And just sieve in the ginger and the flour,

so there it is going in.

Now if you add the flour to that

when it's really, really hot, it doesn't go in smoothly.

And you beat that in and at the end we will add the lemon juice.

- Just half a teaspoon.
- Is that purely for flavour?

It's purely for flavour and it's traditional to add it.

- Got a lovely consistency, a lovely shine to it.
- Perfect.

It's a good thing for, sort of,

teenagers to make at home, cos it's quite fun.

Teenagers just throw it round the house, Mary.

No, they wouldn't.

Now I need an ordinary teaspoon to put them out on here.

- So you want some non-stick parchment.
- Yes.

You don't need to grease it and you put four on here.

And it's no good trying to put too many on a tray at once,

- because if you do, they all run into each other.
- Yes.

And you just, sort of, spoon them around like that.

Can anything go wrong to get to that stage?

If you haven't dissolved the sugar properly, you don't get a good result.

And also you need to let it get cool enough before you add the flour.

How big will these grow? You've left four on there.

Could you have left more of a gap or is that adequate?

They will run almost together, that's about right.

Just leaving an equal space between them.

'Bake the brandy snaps at 180 degrees centigrade or 160 fan.'

And then really it's a matter of watching them

and they want to spread, so that they have little holes in them.

Rather like lace.

Everything that can and will go wrong with baking

is encapsulated in the simple snap of a single biscuit.

All of the bakers may have tasted them before,

but few have attempted making them.

For many, including Yasmin, the measurements

and timings proved difficult to grasp.

How much is a portion?

It's getting too complicated and I've only got an hour and a half.

I'm concerned about timings, it's a lot, 24.

when you can only get four on each.

Then I'm going to oil the spoon handles.

Now you can do them on bigger handles than this,

small rolling pins, depends what size you want them.

I've done tuiles and we put them on broom handles

hanging all over the pastry department.

Yes, that's a good idea

- or it could be small rolling pins, couldn't it?
- Yes.

That's it.

You're going for quite a cigarillo, cigar shape on this one?

So you do have to put a fair bit of oil on them?

You do, it should be a flavourless oil,

not, obviously, a virgin olive oil or something.

Or you can do it with butter, it's so they don't stick.

- Yes.
- How are they doing in the oven?
- Let's have a look.

They do look like lace so I think it's time to come out.

Well, that's what they should look like, good.

They look absolutely right to me.

I wouldn't be able to roll them at this stage as they're too soft.

- Yes.
- Can you see there, look?
- Yes.

When doing more than four at one go,

if some of them go hard on the tray,

you can always just put them back in the oven to soften up again.

- So there is a bit of leeway both sides?
- There is.

You've got to let them get cool enough to roll.

As you can see, at the moment they're not.

Coming from a hot oven to a cool environment,

they start to solidify quite rapidly don't they?

Cos essentially it's the sugars in there beginning to set.

That looks about right, let's put it on here

and you notice how I'm putting the frilly side towards the outside.

- Yes.
- So you do that and roll it round.

- And you can sort of squeeze it with the hand and leave it on.
- Yes.

And then if you want to make little baskets,

you can either put it on top of an orange like this...

There we are.

Don't forget to oil the oranges if you're doing them,

or an apple or anything that's that sort of shape.

SHE SIGHS

If the brandy snaps are not baked enough,

they won't roll properly as Jo discovered.

Mine have just not gone right today. Just can't get them right.

Rob had his own odd ideas to create a consistent batch.

Rob, what went wrong here, love?

No, no, no, it's not what's gone wrong,

- I'm cutting them out using the cutter.
- Oh.

Janet was struggling with the hot mix.

Phew, need asbestos fingers.

It's just very painful, it's almost like torture.

And, finally, Jo realised her mistake was really rather basic.

Oh, what it might have been is my oven is on the wrong temperature.

- My oven was on defrost.
- SHE SIGHS

Once they're cooled, it's time to fill them with whipped cream.

The consistency of the cream needs to be thick and light,

but not too stiff.

That looks about right to me.

- It's so easy to over whip cream.
- Yes.

And I'd rather have it as it was a little bit slack,

drop that down to the bottom...

Bit more in there, that's about right.

So, just shake it down like that.

Then when you're icing a cake, you very often just put two folds

like that and then fold it down, but I find it much easier

to grasp it in one hand, put the other one there

and then twist the top.

And then see when it gets to that stage that it's just coming out.

- Yes.
- Magic.

Right, we're ready. We've slipped these off.

Now, now they are quite hard. You can hear.

Yeah, they are.

And then put it round your thumb like that at the top.

And then push it gently down,

holding it steady till it comes out of the end.

Turn it round, and put it in the other end.

Obviously, you wouldn't fill these until about an hour

- before you need them, ideally.
- Yes.

But these will keep well in an airtight tin.

Now, if by any chance the tin isn't airtight or you're keeping them for over a week,

- they become a bit soft.
- Yes.

So what you do is gently warm them in a low oven.

Spread them out flat on the baking sheet and then

put them in a low oven just until they're in the stage of before

- you roll them and you can roll them up again and they'll be crisp.
- Do the same thing again.

- Exactly.
- Very versatile recipe.

- The world is your oyster.
- Let's see what we can do with this one.

What I've got here is just melted down a little bit of white chocolate,

that's just brushed inside all over.

Oh, how delicious.

It adds a little bit of flavour to it as well which is

essentially what you're doing, you're adding another element to it, which can then be filled with cream.

Now, white chocolate is quite temperamental and it's essential

to melt it slowly, isn't it?

- Yes, yes, definitely.
- If you overheat it it'll get exceedingly runny.

- Yes.
- And it in fact won't set up again.

Exactly, all I'm trying to do, cos you have got holes in this,

and what this is doing, is just covering those holes

- and you can put that in a fridge to set the white chocolate.
- Mmm-hmm.
- Then you can just get some cream...

..fill it all the way to the top.

One more element I think is missing.

Get a strawberry, just cut it not quite to the green.

You're going to have a nice fan.

Yes, slice it six or seven times,

push it down...

..place that on the top.

I think that looks very pretty as well.

Doesn't that look lovely?

At the end of the challenge a variety of snaps were delivered to our judging table.

They come in all shapes and sizes, don't they?

When it came to tasting we were very particular in what we were looking for,

a beautiful golden structure, a good snap,

and consistency across the batch.

They don't snap. A brandy snap should snap.

- These are sort of cocktail size.
- Yes.

- Too small for the amount of mixture.
- Mmm.

Very inconsistent. There's no consistency in colour, is there? Flavour's OK.

Flavour's OK and it's lovely and crisp.

This is a mess.

They're too pale.

Like rubber.

I turned my oven onto defrost by accident.

Ah, that doesn't help.

These are consistent in size, they're thin, they're crispy.

Nice colour.

Just a little bit underwhipped cream.

They're all pretty much the same length.

- These look rather nice.
- These look all right, actually.
- Mmm-hmm.

They're all consistent in their shape, aren't they?

- It's got a good crunch.
- A beautiful crunch, can you hear them?

- Size of them.
- Mmm.

- Are you going to tuck in, Mary?
- I am, can't resist that.

Delicious.

Oh, you can hear how crunchy they are.

Really nice.

Mmm.

I think this was a great technical challenge to see

how they cope with oven work.

It all boils down to oven work.

But in all these challenges what we are seeking is every item

to be uniform and we had all different sizes of brandy snaps

and they should be exactly the same size.

Do you know what makes that a great brandy snap?

Tell me.

The texture, the snap, the taste of the ginger,

and that beautiful caramel flavour it leaves in your mouth,

and all washed down with a load of cream. You can't go wrong.

It is something for a special occasion, isn't it?

Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday

- and possibly Sunday.
- As well.
- But yes.

Next time on the Great British Bake Off: Masterclass...

Mary and I will give you foolproof recipes for four more bake off challenges.

We'll be showing you my ultimate miniature pork pie -

a combination of crisp hot water crust pastry

and a succulent meat and quail's egg filling.

Take a spoonful of the mixture, drop it into the bottom,

push down the bottom, build up a bit of the mix round the side,

that is where the quail's egg is going to sit.

Mary Berry's decadent extravaganza,

the moist, light and perfectly rolled chocolate roulade.

I'm going to beat in a little bit of the egg white.

I'm not going to fold the whole lot in at once,

because if you do that it'll be streaky.

My soft, buttery iced fingers filled with the lightest whipped cream

and strawberry jam.

You can see you've still got some residue flour that needs picking up.

THAT'S when you put the rest of the water in.

And finally, Mary 'queen of desserts' ultimate cake,

sophisticated, bittersweet, dense and rich,

it's the Sachertorte.

It will naturally melt, it won't curdle, it won't separate,

it's quite easy to do, but you must do it off the heat.

I hope the people that watch the programme are inspired to actually start baking at home.

If you follow these masterclasses to the letter without deviation,

you will end up with fantastic bakes.

I'm hoping that when people have seen these masterclasses,

they will be inspired to have a go at home and produce really good results

cos I've tried to go into every detail so they should get success every time.

Welcome to The Great British Bake Off Masterclass.

Judges Mary Berry and I will be doing the baking.

We'll guide you through challenges faced by the bakers in this year's Bake Off.

We will show you some little tips and tricks that will help you at home to create something magical.

From the mixing, to the baking, to the finishing,

to the presentation, at home you will get the same results.

Coming up, my luxury pork pies

encased in notoriously-difficult-to-handle hot water crust pastry,

filled with the perfect combination of pork loin and a quail's egg.

Mary Berry's chocolate roulade recipe.

Mary will show you how to get the perfect roll every time.



My traditional iced fingers - a complex combination

of sweet yet buttery dough, precisely piped with whipped cream and strawberry jam.

And Mary's Sachertorte - a technically tricky, dense chocolate cake

with its signature glossy ganache icing.

'Over the course of eight weeks

'earlier this year, Mary and I saw twelve of the country's

'very best home bakers go head-to-head as they fought it out to be crowned

'Britain's best amateur baker.

'Together, Mary and I devised the three challenges in each round...'

- That's very, very good.
- Absolutely delicious.

'..and the technical challenge was the trickiest of all.'

They come in all shapes and sizes, don't they?

- Some of them are a bit irregular.
- Good gracious!

Eleven really lovely tarte au citron.



Because the recipe was always a surprise on the day,

the bakers had no chance to practise and had to rely completely

on their own knowledge and skill to get a good result.

'Week five of the competition was all about pies, showcasing the bakers' pastry skills,

'but also showing us their understanding of the balance of flavours.

'For the technical challenge, I chose a first for The Great British Bake Off.'

We're going to ask you to make a batch of six miniature pork pies.

And in each pie we'd like there to be one quail's egg

and, for the first time in this competition, we're going to ask you to work with hot water crust pastry.

Pork pies with quails' eggs in the middle and hot water crust pastry.

Yes. I chose this as a technical challenge because it's quite tricky.

Once you've got the hot water crust pastry made,

then it's all about rolling it out.

Then you've got to do the filling for it, put the quail's egg

right in the middle, put the lid on,

crimp it, egg wash it and then, finally, you've got to get that bake bang on.

So, we're going to start with the hot water crust pastry.

We need to weigh up the flours.

So, I'm using two types of flour -

plain flour and strong flour. Overwhelmingly plain flour.

In fact, 200 grams to 40 grams of strong.

Gluten is the wheat protein in flour that gives the dough its elasticity.

Plain flour contains less gluten than strong flour

and is used when a crisper texture is needed in the finished bake.

That little bit of strong will give it a bit of extra gluten to bind it together,

to give it that quality, so when we're rolling it out, it stays quite rubbery, which is what you need.

The next thing I've got is 50 grams of butter and 60 grams of lard,

- all right? A little job for you in a minute, Mary.
- Is it?

- It's melting the lard in boiling water.
- Oh, I can just manage that.

60 grams. You need to melt that in 100ml of boiling water.

One teaspoon of salt in that water, please.

In here, I've got butter and flour.

I'm just going to rub this flour.

I'm interested that you're using butter WITH lard.

When I've ever made hot water crust pastry, I've used ALL lard.

- Are you adding the butter for flavour?
- Unique flavour. It's better.

The butter adds that quality of a little bit of dairy in there,

that flavour of butter, which is good.

- That's melted for you.
- Thank you very much indeed.

Now, this needs to go in here.

Obviously, at this stage, it is going to be rather hot.

Well, the last thing you want is boiling hot fat in your hands.

So, again, stir it round first, incorporating all the flour.

And you can see, it's starting to turn into a proper paste now.

I can touch that now. It cooled off as soon as it impacted on the flour.

Make sure you rub round to get everything out of that bowl.

Beautifully clean bowl.

All on that lump.

I'm just going to put a little bit of flour there, cos it's going to take a bit of working,

just into a ball, so it's more of a smooth paste.

- Just gently work it.
- So, that's to work in the fat evenly?
- That's right, yeah.

Hot water crust pastry requires the mixture to be hot rather than cold,

so as to make the dough easier to roll out.

The large quantity of liquid used produces a hard, strong finish,

making it suitable for holding heavy mixtures.

I'm just going to begin to start flattening.

And now it's essentially been worked into a ball.

- That's very good.
- Now, this one needs to be rolled out with a rolling pin.

It's in there. Flatten it down with your fingers first as much as you can.

Flatten the dough lightly with your fingers and then roll out evenly

with a rolling pin until three to five millimetres thick.

All I'm doing, occasionally, is just putting a little bit of flour on.

I'll tell you why -

it relaxes the dough, so it can skid back to where it should be.

I could roll this the size of this tray with no flour underneath

and what'll happen is, when you put the lids in, it'll shrink back

while it's trying to rest.

And you're going to make it nice and thin,

- that's where the bakers went wrong, some of them. They had it too chunky.
- They had it too thick.

'The bakers seemed a little thrown by my choice of recipe.'

What's it say? Stirring till it comes together.

Work into a ball.

Looks like a ball already.

I'm not going to risk using it all.

That could be my downfall.

'The trickiest stage was the all-important pastry.

'Mary-Anne had never worked with hot water crust dough before.'

It's quite odd working with something that's quite so warm.

Normally, with pastry, it's supposed to be cold, cold, cold.

'Jo made an early error with her pastry.'

I got the flour wrong.

But, hopefully, it's right now.

'Holly was also unfamiliar with this type of pastry.'

I don't get how this pastry works at all. It's rock hard.

It's quite odd stuff.

These are the trays that we're going to use. These are the trays that the bakers had.

The main thing is they've got to have almost straight sides and not buntings that are sort of round.

You don't want the shallow ones, you want straight sides. That's key.

Six of these.

Now, what I'm going to do, I need to make the cut for the base,

obviously to line the base, to line the side,

and then to line about 5ml to 10ml away from the edge of that.

Find something around the kitchen that will fit that size.

- A small saucer you could run round. Something like that.
- Yeah, that would be fine.

Make sure it's relaxed.

Get a little knife. Just cut gently round.

You want to get it as smooth as you can.

Press up against the side and get right down to the bottom.

Get it down as much as you can.

There's your overlap. There's plenty extra if you need it.

You're pressing down and getting rid of all those folds,

- but keeping the pastry very thin...
- Yeah.

- ..all the way round and the base.
- Exactly. Exactly.

- There is no need to grease the tins when you're making these pies?
- Not these ones, no.

This has got so much fat in this mix,

it should just slide out anyway.

The chances of this thing sticking are very rare.

'Form the excess pastry back into a small ball.

'Roll out again to the same thickness as before

'and using a small cutter

'cut out six lids large enough to just cover the top of your pie cases.'

On the top of every lid, we need to have a hole, and that's to get the gelatine in later.

If you get a little piping-bag nozzle, put it into the middle,

make your hole, and then just gently open it up.

It has to be quite a big hole

in order to be able to pour the gelatine in?

Yes. Yes, it does.

'Line a baking tray with greaseproof paper and lay the lids on.'

These are going to go in the fridge now, just for about half an hour,

just to chill down slightly, again harden the lard and the butter.

'Placing the baking tray in the fridge helps firm up the pastry.'

While they're chilling down, we're going to make the filling.

This is some streaky, unsmoked bacon - 100 grams,

and 300 grams of pork loin.

Now, pork loin's got, obviously, very little fat in there,

and that's the reason we add the streaky bacon -

to add a bit of fat to it, a little bit of flavour to it, as well.

It does make a difference in the pork pie.

So, would you mind chopping up that as finely as you could, please?

- I will. Nice and fine and I'll remove this bit of sinew here.
- Yes, lovely.

Sinew pieces will never go tender...

- Yeah.
- ..and I will just trim it off.

Also, what's going in there, is an onion and a small bunch of parsley.

I'd much rather cut this by hand. You get a better texture.

If you did it in a processor, it could easily get like sausage meat.

And every little piece is going to be tender,

- because the loin is the most tender part of pork.
- Exactly, yes.

The binding agent will be the pork. It'll bind everything together.

You're looking for a dispersion of onion blended with pork

and again, a good blend of the bacon in there

and, finally, a little bit of zing coming from the parsley.

Was there a reason why you used unsmoked bacon?

- Smoked bacon will just overwhelm everything.
- Oh, right.

Essentially, the bacon's been added more as a fat, but again, it gives you a bit of flavour as well.

- So, you don't want it to overwhelm the pork, but just balance with it.
- And the seasoning?

Once I've blended it all, then I'll season it, yes.

I use quite a bit of salt.

The only seasoning, really, is actually going to come from the bacon.

Do you know, at home, if I'm doing this,

I am not too good at seasoning, because you can't taste it.

So, what I do, is I take a little bit of that out

and sort of squeeze it together

and fry it in a little flavourless oil, and then taste it, and then you know

- whether you've got the seasoning quite right.
- That's a nice tip.

Give that a good mix, cos what you don't want is all that salt to stay in one place.

Then, the next job is quails' eggs.

- Right.
- I need to boil these quails' eggs.

Some of them had difficulty about boiling quails' eggs.

- Apparently, yeah.
- They weren't quite sure how long to do them.

I do mine, for hard boiled, two and a half minutes.

How long do you boil a quail's egg for? Do you know?

- No-one seems to know.
- Well...
- How long do you boil a quail egg? Does anyone know?
- All I know...

- is under two and a half minutes, cos this is overdone!
- Is it?
- Yeah.

I don't know! Something so small, timing it right.

And it must soft-boiled not hard-boiled cos they're going to cook again inside the pie.

So, I think that's going to be very tricky.

Are you ready? Jump up if you are.

I've never boiled an egg before.

- What, just a normal egg or just a quail's egg?
- A normal egg.

- You've never boiled a normal egg before?!
- No.

You can make a macaroon but you can't boil an egg?

No.

It's important, as soon as they're cool, to peel them.

If you leave them for half an hour, it's difficult to get the shell off.

So, that's the last one peeled.

- There you are.
- Beautifully done. Thank you very much, Mary.

OK, they're the shells and they're the lids.

Now it's a case of putting it all together.

Put your fingers into the side, encourage them to have a flat side where hits the base.

While it's cold, it's the best time to do it. It'll give you a little bit more leeway, you know?

- And, of course, it gives more room for the meat.
- Exactly, yeah.

Take a spoonful of the mixture, drop it into the bottom.

When that's in, you need to push that down to the bottom with your fingers.

Push down the bottom, build up the mixture round the side.

That is where the quail's egg will sit.

Paul, you've chosen to do six individual ones.

Could you do these in a loaf tin?

- Yes, you could.
- Same amount of mixture?

Yeah, same amount and again, you just build it up, put one on each,

or use a proper egg, a full-size chicken egg and just put them all the way along.

'Once all six quails' eggs have been placed,

'fill the remainder of the cavity with the rest of the pork meat,

'ensuring it's packed tightly around the sides and on top of the eggs.'

It's really essential to press it down.

I think some of them had some gaps through not pressing it down.

Yeah. When we cut the pie open, you saw the egg floating round

with a little bit of pork, because they never compressed all the pork down.

Now, the next stage is to egg-wash it and then pop the lid on.

Now, if we start here, all I'm going to do is just delicately brush a little bit of egg round here.

And this is just so the lid can adhere to the base.

So, now we're ready to put the lids on this.

'Once the pies have been topped,

'trim the edges with a knife to neaten and seal

'with some decorative crimping.'

Fingers in, lift up the side.

- You could do it with a fork if you're no good at crimping, couldn't you?
- Yeah, course you could.

'Top each pie with egg-wash and they're ready for the oven.'

Going to go into a fan oven at 190 for 40 minutes.

They look amazing.

A lovely golden brown colour on top.

What I want to do is pop a knife in there

and just open that hole up a bit.

Over in this pan,

we've got 100ml of water, which is bringing up to the boil.

In there, we've dropped one chicken stock cube.

What I've got here is leaf gelatine. You can use the powdered gelatine,

although this tends to be a bit easier

cos it just softens in the water.

Powdered gelatine you have to bring back with boiling water and dissolve it.

I'll just squeeze the water out of there.

And this will then go inside the stock and dissolve.

It's pretty much instant with this stuff.

'Once dissolved,

'transfer to a jug and gradually fill the pork pie cavities.'

You've got to be really careful, haven't you?

And pour very, very gently and watch when it comes...

- Yes.
- ..anywhere near the top.
- Exactly.

And then you need to chill them, preferably overnight,

and the pure reason being is that you want to solidify that gelatine.

But don't put these into the fridge until they're cold.

You can't put warm pork into a fridge.

Leave them out till they're cool,

then pop them in the fridge overnight.

In the morning, you'll end up with some beautiful pork pies.

Like a battalion of little soldiers!

'When it came to the judging, however, to be honest,

'I was highly impressed.'

I like the look of this.

There's been some form of display. There's a pattern round the outside which looks nice.

And it's got a good colour on it, as well. It's a good bake.

I must say, I like that, the appearance.

It looks homemade and inviting and it's lovely thin pastry.

- Good flavour. I like that.
- So do I.

It's a lovely thin crust.

That's one of the things that's difficult to get right,

I'm sure you found. You're not too sure whether you've put your fingers

into the very corner at the bottom to make it thin, as well.

They look so tempting.

I am dying to taste one.

- There you go.
- That does look very, very good.

- You like?
- I am savouring every bit.

It's nice, isn't it?

Well, what I like is the pastry is really, really crisp. Mmm.

In the sixth week of the Bake Off,

we decided to test the bakers on their dessert-making skills.

Our challenges included a baked cheesecake,

the French classic croque-en-bouche

and, for the technical challenge,

Mary chose a classic recipe that really stretched our bakers.

Today's technical challenge is...

a chocolate roulade,

A nice, thin sponge, neatly filled and neatly rolled.

This is a difficult challenge, this one.

So, Mary, why did you pick

the chocolate roulade as a technical challenge?

Because I simply love it.

It's good as a dessert and it's good as a special cake too.

And this recipe is extremely light... it has no flour in.

But it's quite tricky, so it's good to show everybody how to do it.

The trickiness comes down to the actual folding

and that's what makes it a special technical challenge.

Exactly. It's difficult to roll,

because you can end up by not getting a Catherine wheel effect.

- Where do you want to start?
- I want to start with the tin.

Now, the tin is 23 by 33 centimetres and it wants to be straight-sided.

And if you haven't got a tin like this,

if your roasting tin is similar

it'll work, you just need to line up the sides.

I'm using non-stick parchment.

And you just fold it to, sort of, the size of the tin.

Now, the tin needs to be buttered,

- because you want the paper to stick to it, otherwise it'll slip.
- Yes.

Then we come to the ingredients.

First of all the chocolate.

And we need 175 grams of that. That's six ounces.

And I don't use one of the high cocoa content chocolate.

If you use high cocoa content 70%, it really is too bitter.

I agree. I think a lot of chocolate nowadays is very bitter.

This is just the bar that you'll buy in the sweet shop.

- Yeah.
- But it must be pure chocolate.

And the way to melt that is not to be rushed.

If you are in a hurry, you need to chop that up finely.

If this pan is boiling,

it will melt too quickly and you'll get a hard crust on it.

So, gently, gently. Remember that chocolate melts in a child's pocket,

so it doesn't need intense heat.

- OK.
- Then we come to the eggs. I've got six eggs here.

And I'm going to put the whites in here and the yolks in there.

And you want to make quite sure that you get no egg yolk in with the egg white,

because if you do, the egg whites won't whisk up to a full volume.

The raising agent in this is the egg white.

People that do have a problem with flour actually in recipes,

this is an ideal one.

Yes. And this is something that coeliacs can eat.

Do you utilise these egg yolks at all?

These egg yolks are going into the roulade.

We're going to mix them with the sugar.

But I start off by doing the egg whites,

- then I don't have to wash the whisk in-between.
- Yeah.

And then whisk on full volume until it'll look a bit like cloud.

The egg whites need to be stiff, but not dry.

This will take one to two minutes.

That's just about right.

It looks like cloud.

I'm going to tip the egg yolks into a bowl here.

I need to whisk those with sugar.

175 grams of caster sugar.

In it goes.

And I'm going to whisk those together.

There's egg white on there. That doesn't matter.

Put that in. Again, full speed ahead!

As that is whisking,

if there's a bit of egg yolk and sugar at the top,

as there is on the top of that bowl,

just scrape it down all the way round,

or you'll get streaks in it.

- That's it. And then not quite ready, so on full speed ahead again.
- Yeah.

The mixture is ready after two or three minutes

when thick and creamy in consistency.

- Right, now you can see that it holds its shape.
- Yeah.

It's called the ribbon stage.

Next, add the melted and cooled chocolate

and stir until combined.

Now, I'm going to take some of the egg white.

I'm not going to fold the whole lot in at once,

cos if you do that, it'll be streaky.

- Yeah.
- I'm going to beat in a bit of the egg white.

So, a couple of really good spoons going in there like that.

So, this will slacken it down.

And I'm beating that in and it'll make it a bit more runny.

Now, that looks well included,

those first two tablespoons in with the chocolate.

It's quite smooth.

And I'm going to add the rest all at once of the egg whites.

I'm going to tip that up and then put this in.

So, this is the crucial bit really, isn't it, the roulade?

- It is.
- You slacken it off first

before adding the majority of the egg whites.

And I'm going to fold that in, and folding is going round

the edge of the bowl and then cutting through the middle.

And that wants to be a very gentle movement.

So, because the egg white is the rising agent,

- you're trying to keep as much air in that as possible at this stage?
- Exactly.

Exactly. There is no flour in here.

If they don't incorporate all the egg whites into this mix,

- you'll get this mottled effect within the sponge, of white?
- That's right.

I know the consistency looks like it's split.

It has those little sort of dots of...

- Of moisture and then dry and moist and dry.
- Exactly.

I've got the cocoa. I'm going to put two tablespoons in.

Must sieve it, because we don't want it in lumpy.

And don't mistakenly put drinking chocolate in,

because that would be a very weak flavour.

But it is the cocoa that stabilises the mixture.

You'll get a good rise and it'll be a little bit firmer.

As well as adding richness to the flavour,

cocoa powder has a binding quality that helps

the ingredients to combine and create a firmer, more stable sponge.

I know some recipes don't put any cocoa in.

But I've tried all sorts to get the ultimate one

and I think this one is the best.

And then I'm going to fold that in just as I did before,

round the outside of the bowl and cut through the middle.

And only mix until it is...

everything has just included.

- Don't over-mix it.
- Yeah.

Once you've mixed this, you've got to put it in the tin

and bake it straightaway.

Once the mixture is in the tin,

it needs to be baked straightaway so no air is lost.

And then push the mixture into the sides.

If you don't push it into the sides, it won't rise evenly.

You're looking for a nice,

- even layer so the roulade is nice and flat and square.
- That's right.

So, that wants to go in the oven at 160 fan

and that will take about 20 or 25 minutes.

Bake the roulade until it's risen and starting to come away

from the sides with a firm and crisp top.

That looks just right.

It's got a crust on top.

It does slightly sink and expect it to. And it is well risen.

- And all we've got to do now is let it get cool.
- OK.

It must be cold before you put the cream in,

otherwise the cream seeps into the mixture and also it melts.

- Yeah.
- So, we'll let that get cold.

Mary's roulade recipe was a great choice

and allowed our bakers to showcase their knowledge.

So, listen, have you made a roulade before?

I have, back in the day at school. It was my nemesis!

Jo clearly knew the secret of how to mix a roulade.

You can knock the air out of them.

They need to be really light and airy.

Janet had her own technique,

which proved she knew her stuff.

I don't want to take any of the air away by patting it too much.

Oh, go on, get in the corner.

And Holly demonstrated her understanding of the science of the sponge.

It's a little bit uneven, but that's the problem with fatless sponges.

I think they're quite hard to smooth over

cos they don't have that fat to kind of even out as it, as it melts.

Once cooled, it's ready for the filling.

Take 300ml of double cream and whisk until thick.

Important to have a double cream that pours.

- Mm-hm.
- Look out for the word 'pouring' on the side of the pack.

What it is to have such force.

I think I'll stand to one side while you're doing that.

It's unlikely that you'll over-whip when you do it by hand.

If you do it with a machine,

the machine easily over-whips and then it would separate.

That looks the perfect consistency.

Really firm.

I thought that might be coming over my head, yes.

Right, so, we're going to turn this out.

Take another piece of paper, and this is non-stick,

put it on the worktop,

and then a little icing sugar over the top.

You can do this with a sieve or you can do it with a shaker.

And there'll be a cloud of icing sugar

which will come all over us, so watch out.

So, just take hold of that and give it one bold tip.

- Yeah.
- One, two, three, over.

Remove the tin and carefully peel away the baking paper,

before topping with the cream.

Now, I've chosen to put whipped cream in here.

You could also put some chopped strawberries, raspberries.

- Cherries.
- Cherries. Stoned cherries.

- Yeah.
- But, of course, if you're going to freeze it,

you would freeze it just with cream in.

- And, believe it or not, it freezes beautifully.
- Really?

Just spread that over,

right to the edges.

Now, the rolling up is the part I enjoy.

- It's the part that a lot of people are terrified of.
- Mm-hm.

I'll give you a foolproof way of doing it.

To get a tight roll, you take a knife

and you almost cut through about half an inch from the end.

And then you break that, absolutely break it,

because I'm expecting loads of cracks. It's part of its charm.

So, get hold of that and physically break it all the way along there.

- And that is the middle of the sort of Catherine wheel...
- Yeah.

..and it's what you do for the best result.

Pick up the paper, hold it and then just gently make that go round.

Now, this is cracking all the time that I do it,

and as I'm turning it, I'm pressing the cracked bits back in.

And quite firmly.

- Can you see I'm doing that quite firmly as you go.
- Yeah.

Our bakers had a real problem with this

because they were nervous about, quite rightly, rolling it up.

Janet forgot the crucial element, icing sugar on the baking parchment.

It's the only way of preventing the sponge from sticking.

Ahh! I should have put icing sugar or caster sugar on the bottom,

cos of the fudginess of it.

How absolutely ridiculous to make a stupid error like that.

This doesn't even count as a roulade. It looks like a disaster area.

This is the scary bit.

Ooh, and it's cracking!

Needs a corset!

That's what it needs.

Doesn't look like it's done yet.

Holly wasn't too pleased with the finished result.

Oh, dear. Doesn't look great, does it?

I need some Mary Berry advice, that's what I need!

Push that again and more cracks.

To ensure perfect presentation,

finish the last roll of the roulade on your serving plate.

Top with a final dusting of icing sugar

and neaten by trimming both ends.

- Aha.
- And there it is.

And you should have a nice, tight spiral

like a Swiss roll, like Catherine wheel.

What you've showed us today is certainly...

you can see where they've slipped up.

And if they'd followed some basic rules,

they would have ended up with something as perfect as that.

In the blind tasting,

we were looking at the execution of the roll as well as the taste.

I quite like the look of this one!

- It's quite tasty.
- Mmm, it's very good.

- It has broken up a lot.
- It's not bad.
- But they've tried to do a swirl.

The overall appearance of it looks quite nice, though.

- The flavour's good.
- Flavour's good.

Now, this one looks nice. Slightly cracked.

- It's got a nice taste.
- Mm.

There's a little bit of a bend there. A little bit of a curl.

- Yeah. This one's made quite a bit of effort to get a good roll.
- Yeah.

I enjoy chocolate roulade.

I think it's just a fantastic and beautiful-looking thing.

It just looks gorgeously filled with all that cream

and I think the informality of the cracking just is tempting.

It's quite a dense sponge, but the flavour's in there,

that lightness which the meringue adds to it.

- Then you have that beautiful cream that lifts it to another level.
- I think it's a winner.

In week seven, the bakers reached the semi-final.

Precision and finesse would be the key.

It was my turn to set the technical bake and, even if I say it myself,

what a brilliant choice my favourite childhood sweet treat proved to be.

Today's Technical Challenge is one of my all-time favourites -

iced fingers.

12 identical fingers, filled with cream and jam.

So, Paul, why have you chosen these iced buns

- for your Technical Challenge?
- I grew up with them

and they're one of my favourite things I've had in a bakery.

My dad used to be pretty good at them.

I bet you've chosen it

cos there's plenty of time for people to go wrong.

There are a few stages that you can go wrong,

but it's down to the rolling stage and dough stage.

Right, to start with, I need 500 grams of strong white flour.

Can't use plain flour, you have to use strong.

Plain flour's for biscuits and crackers.

- BOTH:
- And cakes.
- You almost forgot that.
- Ha-ha, you see!

And strong flour is for bread.

Strong flour is best for baking breads and recipes

where yeast is used, as it ensures a good, even rise and crumb structure.

500 grams of flour straight in the bowl.

Mm-hmm.

The next thing I'm going to add is my yeast, and I'm using...

instant or fast-action yeast, and here, I've got 14 grams.

Straight in to the side.

The next thing I'm going to add in is 40 grams of butter.

Is that salted butter or unsalted butter?

- For this you can use either and I'm using unsalted.
- Mmm.

And then I'm going to put in ten grams of salt,

just normal cooking salt.

Salt goes in opposite to the yeast.

It's a nice little tip this.

Salt on yeast will certainly retard it if not kill it.

So, you blend the yeast in first, then blend the salt in.

OK. The next thing to go in is caster sugar.

And you want 50 grams of caster sugar in there.

The reason why I'm using caster sugar is actually because...

you don't want to feel the grains inside the dough. That's the only reason.

And then I've got two eggs to go in there as well.

- Whole eggs?
- Yes, whole eggs.
- You don't have to beat them?
- No, you're fine.

Two eggs straight in. Next thing to add is your milk and your water.

Now, over there, I've got 150 mil of warm milk.

Milk tends to slow yeast down.

So, if you warm the milk up a little bit,

it'll act as a starter for the yeast, so it'll get growing.

The next thing I'm going to is add the water.

I've got 140 mil of water.

Hold some back, and I'll show you why.

To start with,

- here we go, I'll move this out of the way.
- Action.

I'm going to get really messy, you know?

Get your hands in and just stir with your fingers to start it off.

Could you do this in a mixer if you wanted to?

You could. I prefer to use my hands.

Now, this is really a conventional dough, so it's not too wet.

You can see there you've still got some residue flour that needs picking up.

That's when you put the rest of the water in. Put a little bit in there.

And at this stage, it's coming together. See? It's become one ball.

- Yeah.
- It's ready to tip out onto a lightly floured surface.

A dusting of flour on it.

Get your dough. Pop it in there.

I've compensated to the fact that people will add flour into that.

That's why you start with a wetter dough, OK?

Now, begin just by turning it, rolling it over like this.

Flip it over, roll, roll, roll.

Look at the muscles going!

What I'm trying to do is incorporate the eggs, the butter

and everything into that dough to get it smoother.

- Those people who've got bread making machines...
- Yeah.

- could they do this in there?
- Yeah.

What I'm doing is just building up the gluten.

The gluten is now releasing from the flour particles,

going into the dough, and forming, you can see there,

the stretches that you see, where the dough's beginning to split?

- Mmm. Yeah.
- That is the beginning...
- Let me feel it.
- ..of the gluten.

- Yeah. It's still quite a wet dough, isn't it?
- It is.

Yeah, well it's a soft dough.

It's a soft dough rather than a wet dough. And then begin to stretch.

See, I'm just holding the back.

You pummel at that for at least five to ten minutes.

And this dough will begin to get smoother and smoother.

All the sugar will begin to dissolve.

It will become more glutinous.

You've got a nice, soft dough there that's well incorporated.

- That goes back into your bowl.
- Right.

- Would you Clingfilm that for me, please?
- I will. I've got cleaner hands.

Yes, it just prevents the dough from skinning.

So, what is happening at the moment, the yeast is beginning to eat,

feed itself on the flour.

And then it'll exhaust itself, so it'll grow, grow, multiply, get bigger.

You need to leave it for about an hour and a quarter. It'll then at least double in size.

- And you just put the Clingfilm over the top?
- Yeah.

Leave it in an ambient temperature. Normal household conditions.

Room temperature's around 20 Celsius. That's perfect.

Proving is the pre-baked period,

where yeast reacts with the liquid and flour to produce carbon dioxide,

causing the dough to rise without heat.

So, Paul, this has risen like Vesuvius.

It's huge cos of the heat in here.

You've got to be careful when you peel this off.

That's the structure of the gluten we built up when we kneaded it.

- Right.
- And this has proved up. Proving, rising, it's the same.

Now, I heed to tip this out onto a floured surface.

Run your finger round it

and dig all of this lovely, soft dough out.

Now, I need to coat this.

A bit of flour.

Cos as it rests, or proves, it actually gets softer.

Even softer.

Now, I need to divide this...

into 12. So, just divide in half.

And again.

- And again.
- And each in three.
- Yeah, each one into three.

To ensure perfectly even-size fingers, you can weigh the dough.

Each piece needs to be 70 grams.

Get each one and you just ball it up.

Turn it on the table...and a ball.

Shape all 12 pieces into balls,

then hand-roll into fingers, approximately five inches in length.

Place in two rows of six on a non-stick baking tray.

Again, gently roll them out first, and they're nice and equal.

That goes on the tray.

- They look beautifully even.
- They're perfect.

Right, I'm going to put those to prove,

but in our house, I'd have to put them away from the dog.

The fingers need to prove for about 40 minutes until doubled in size.

OK, Mary, here they are, fully risen.

And you can see, if you touch it, they spring back.

- They've risen, so they all touch each and will have soft sides.
- Exactly.

OK, Mary. These are going to go in the oven now for 10 minutes. 190 fan or 210 non-fan, all right?

- Very hot, then?
- Very hot oven and very quickly.

Cos of the sugar and eggs in there, it will actually bake very quickly.

But I want them to remain soft, which is why they're only getting 10 minutes.

Here we are, Mary, cooled buns.

They look a beautiful regiment.

Got to then split these off.

And, of course, there's the structure you're looking for. Nice...

and soft. Smell that.

It smells divine.

It was a complex recipe with many stages.

These fingers required meticulous and strict attention to detail.

Mary-Anne took a very professional approach.

Consistency is what they look for, especially in batches, and they want 12.

And when the judges ask for a batch, they want consistency across the batch,

which is why I'm taking the time to

make sure that the dough is

approximately the same weight - about 85 grams in each one.

What's in a few grams? But they will make a difference.

I just know he's going to have his eagle eye

looking for unequal-looking buns.

Here we are, Mary. Cooled buns.

They look a beautiful regiment.

Separate the fingers and leave them to cool whilst you make the icing.

Icing sugar goes in, 200 grams.

OK, I'm also going to add water. Do we get a spoon?

'Course not. Use your fingers.

Cos you get to feel the icing as well.

I'd put a little bit more water in that - not a lot.

The secret is not to get too much runny icing

because it runs down the side.

You'll need to use approximately 32 millilitres of water,

or enough to achieve a loose but not runny consistency.

So, what you're looking for is that.

- See the way it holds its shape...
- It's got a lovely shine, too.

Exactly. And that holds. Once it's dripped once, it stops.

And that's the texture you're looking for in the icing sugar.

OK, get your bun, drop it in,

wriggle it around a bit,

lift it out, run your finger down it...

There you go.

'Once all the fingers are iced,

'leave aside for a few minutes until set.'

'When it came to the all-important finishing,

'Jo really struggled cos her icing was far too runny.'

- So, this was Paul's way? This is Paul's dipping?
- Yes, this is dipping.

I don't like the dipped look. I lost half of it on the table.

It all dripped down. Try and tidy this up a little.

Holly was well aware that consistency was key.

It says in the recipe to dip them in the icing.

And I don't think I can do that,

so this is what I'm going to do instead.

I'm quite good at making things look the same. So, even if they don't taste that good

I hope I'll get a couple of points for the fact that they look quite similar.

Oh, it's blooming hard work!

I didn't know how you could dip in to a thick paste,

so I thought I would do what I hoped would be better...

or as good.

- OK, Mary, if I give you these four here...
- Right.

..what I'd like you to do -

a diagonal line about three-quarters of the way through.

- A diagonal line.
- A diagonal line.

- Just slice it down.
- Below the icing?
- Yes.

'Open up the fingers and pipe in a generous amount of cream.'

You've made a few of these in your time?

I've done a few of these in my time!

'Finish by piping a line of jam across the cream

'and top with a dusting of icing sugar.'

There you go - some classic iced buns filled with cream

and a line of jam.

They just look absolutely mouth-watering.

- We had very varied results, didn't we, in the icing?
- We did.

Gosh, this is...

- Don't they look good?
- I'm pleasantly surprised.

'Our judging all rested on presentation and the perfect bake.

'This was, after all, the semi-final.'

- Mmm.
- These are nice. Good, even bake. Icing's not bad.

- Quite nice this zigzag finish here, isn't it?
- Mmm.

Just done. Another minute or two less they wouldn't have been baked.

That's a nice iced bun. The texture's good.

It's soft.

It's got an equal colour.

It's beautiful.

The icing hasn't covered the whole top,

- but it's got a nice taste, hasn't it?
- Mmm!
- It's very, very good.
- Absolutely delicious!

Now, this one, it's got more of uniform icing on it,

although the icing was a little bit too wet -

that's why it's run down the side.

I think you've done us proud. Those look absolutely wonderful.

To be nice and coated all over, and then lots and lots of cream inside,

and again a nice piping of jam. You don't need a lot of jam.

Just one line just to balance up. They are beautiful things made properly.

The texture of them is so soft.

Using that enriched dough makes them beautiful.

- Mmm.
- Do you like them?
- They're nectar.

- They're lovely, aren't they?
- Mmm!
- Delicious.

'By the final, I think the bakers knew the score.

'That nothing but perfect baking and presentation would do in order for Mary and I to choose

'who would crowned Britain's best amateur baker.

'The final technical bake had to be the most demanding of the series,

'so Mary selected a recipe that would give the bakers no margin for error.'

Our technical challenge today is our hardest yet.

It is the Sachertorte.

You've got a really dense torte and on top we need to get a nice,

shiny slick of chocolate ganache.

Sachertorte, Mary. This was the technical challenge at the final.

Why did you choose that one?

I chose it because I don't think any of them had ever made it before.

It's the ultimate cake that you would find in a very posh hotel

and it is difficult to make.

It's a one-tier cake with a very dense cake mixture,

and the icing has to be really shiny.

And also, it tested their piping skills

because they had to write "Sacher" across the top

and get the spelling right.

So, Mary, how do we start to make this cake?

First of all, the cake tin.

This is a nine inch, 23 centimetre cake tin.

It's got a loose base. And I've really well greased that.

And then if you put a piece of non-stick paper in the bottom -

that will make sure that we get it out. First of all,

I start with the creaming mixture

and I'd like 150 grams of unsalted butter.

So, that goes into the mixing machine.

And then 100 grams of caster sugar.

And, of course, you use caster sugar rather than granulated

cos you don't want any granules in the cake.

- Turn that on just to mix it for a moment, then add the caster sugar.
- Yeah.

'The mixture will be ready after two or three minutes,

'once the sugar is combined and the texture is light and thick.'

That looks absolutely fine now.

It's a lot whiter, it's beautifully creamy and it'll be less granular from the sugar.

The next thing to go in is melted chocolate,

and I've got 150 grams.

It's plan chocolate. It's not the posh 70%,

- it's 39% cocoa solids.
- OK.

And I melted it over the top of a pan of hot water.

- Slowly I've taken it off and it's just got to the pouring stage.
- OK.

If you put it in hot, of course it would melt the butter and the sugar.

At the same time, I'm going to put vanilla extract in

and I'm going to use half a teaspoon.

- It smells lovely, doesn't it?
- It does.

'Whisk until the chocolate

'is fully incorporated and the colour is even.'

That, to me, looks well whisked.

Now we add the eggs.

Five large eggs, please.

First of all, I'm going to separate the eggs.

Do it very carefully cos you don't want to get

the yolks and the whites mixed.

Put the yolks in there, the whites in here.

Obviously, five eggs in this relatively small mix

is quite a lot of eggs. It's going to be very, very rich.

It's very rich, it's very dense, but that's all part of its charm.

I'm going to add the egg yolk and I shall turn this on full speed.

'Add the egg yolks one at a time.

'Once all are combined, sieve in 55 grams of plain flour.'

The reason I'm sieving the flour, Paul, is it's an expensive cake

and I'm just taking every precaution that it's perfect.

And also, we're going to add some ground almonds.

It almost acts like a binding agent just to pull the mix together?

It stabilises the mixture and will help it to keep.

This cake is much better eaten the day after.

And the ground almonds also add to the denseness.

So, in that goes, 75 grams.

And, at this stage, it's folding it in.

So, round the outside of the bowl

and fold it in, and it will be very stiff at this stage.

- What liquid is left to go in this, then? Egg white?
- Just egg whites, that's all.

And fresh egg whites give much more volume.

An older egg white is runny when you crack it

and you can't get such a volume.

Whisk it up until it looks like cloud.

So, again on full speed.

Now, this is not ready, but I just want to show it to you.

This really hasn't got full volume yet. It's still rather yellow.

It will get a bit whiter than that and it'll be sort of soft peaks.

But it just needs a bit more. You can over-whip it at this stage. And, if so,

it breaks into pieces in the top of the bowl.

'Whisk the egg whites for a couple of minutes

'until they're stiff but not dry.'

That looks just what I'm wanting.

So, we've got plenty of volume there

and I'm going to take about a third of that into here.

I think that's just about a third.

So, I'm beating that in.

- This just slackens down the mix to allow you to put the rest in.
- Exactly.

So, I'm going to take the rest of the egg white

and put that in in one go.

This is the key stage, I think,

when you're starting to fold in lightly the last bit of meringue.

Once you've slackened off the mix,

the addition of the extra essentially air

being added to a slacker mix would then retain the air.

Adding it to a thicker mix in one bulk would just decimate the air bubbles

- and therefore give you a flatter Sachertorte as well.
- Exactly. It's coming through.

I'm doing it carefully and slowly.

And, if you want to, you can make the actual base of the Sachertorte

a day before or two days before and then ice it when you want it.

So, all that mixture out in more or less one blob,

and then you're not taking the air out of it. So, in it goes.

And it's a perfect mixture, absolutely smooth.

If you haven't mixed the egg white in properly,

- what happens, it looks curdled.
- Yeah.

Then, important to level this.

It will not take its own level because it's a fairly stiff mixture.

And try not to get it up the sides of the tin,

because that'll just burn on the tin and also be difficult to get out.

- It's not going to grow massively up the side of that, is it?
- No.

It'll just be a little bit deeper. So, that's ready to go into the oven.

- You should have your oven set, and it should be 160 fan.
- Yeah.

That's 180 in a conventional oven.

It'll take between 45 minutes and 50 minutes.

It's got to be shrinking away from the sides of the tin.

It has a slight crust on the top.

If it does sink, it usually means that you've slightly undercooked it.

'At this stage in the competition,

'all the bakers were aware of exactly what they needed to do to impress us.'

It's going to be quite a hard challenge and I haven't actually made one of these before.

But I've made ganache and I have made a torte before, so, yeah,

we'll see how it goes.

'Mary-Anne had her own way of melting, or burning, chocolate.'

I'm melting some more chocolate because the first lot burnt.

'Mixing in the egg whites was no problem for Holly.'

This first couple of spoons full are just to loosen,

cos otherwise it's very, very hard to fold egg whites

into a stiff cake mixture.

'Jo was also confident she knew the tricks when it came to mixing.'

Well, you just have to do these cutting motions rather than...

You don't want to lose the air.

It's...

..OK. It's not completely level.

- So, the cake is baked and it is level across the top.
- Yeah.

I've freed it from the tin, still have the paper underneath,

and this is absolutely cooled, and you just peel that off the base.

With it being quite a robust cake, you can actually treat it

a little bit harder.

'Place on a serving plate and spread the cake

'with gently warmed apricot jam.'

Sieved apricot jam. Of course, you don't want to get that too hot,

just enough to melt it.

If it's really thick, you can add a little water to it.

It just helps to seal in the moisture of the cake, doesn't it, with the apricot jam?

Not only does it seal in the moisture, it means that

any loose crumb is attached to the cake and doesn't get in and spoil the icing.

- These little air bubbles in the top, can you just push them down slightly?
- Just press them down.

And if you press it down and fill it with apricot jam,

- that'll make it quite level.
- Yeah.

'Allow the jam to set whilst making the icing.'

- The icing is a, a chocolate ganache.
- Yeah.

And I'm going to put double cream - and it must double pouring cream.

And that's 200 millilitres.

'Ganache is a rich chocolate mixture commonly used as an icing or filling

'and forms the base for chocolate truffles.'

Then a plain chocolate, 150 grams.

That's five ounces.

- And we're using the same chocolate that went into the cake as well?
- Exactly.

There's steam coming up from the cream. Take it off the heat

and tip the chocolate into that.

That will just start to melt, and on no account put it back on the heat.

It will naturally melt. It won't curdle, it won't separate.

It's quite easy to do, but you must do it off the heat.

'Once the cream and chocolate are well combined,

'leave to cool for a few minutes until thickened slightly.

'Then pour the ganache over the top of the torte.'

- I'm just letting it take its own form.
- Mmm.

Then I'm going to encourage it to slip down the front...

..and all around, tilting it.

I can just run along here, like that, and it will run down.

If you haven't got it quite right, you're going to have to use a palette knife dipped in water.

But I've been able to avoid that,

because you do begin to lose the shine.

'Finish by scraping the excess chocolate

'from the edge of the plate with a palette knife

'and wipe clean with damp kitchen paper.

'Leave the torte for a couple of hours for the icing to set,

'then pipe the word "Sacher" across the top

'in melted milk chocolate for a classic finish.'

Just going to ruin my cake, that's what's going to happen. Right.

'The icing of the torte was critical and the pressure showed.'

That's it.

'Holly proved she knew the secret when piping a Sachertorte.

'Don't stop halfway, and do it all in one go as if handwriting.'

'Mary-Anne's daughter, Sacha,

'was the cause of her simple spelling mistake.'

SHE GASPS

You wrote Sacha!

'In judging, we were meticulous.

'We wanted an event cake with a mirrored finish.

'They did well!'

- Well, we've got some shiny tops, haven't we?
- Shall we start from this side?
- Yeah.

The ganache could have been a little bit thick, but it has got the right consistency.

- That cake looks pretty well done as well.
- The cake looks very good.

Getting the apricot through, which is good.

I think it's a nice cake, that one.

It's a nice cake - a little over decorated.

Yeah.

Now, this one, it's got the nice ganache on, this one.

I think that could have done with a little bit longer bake.

It's got more of a high mirror finish, which is what you're looking for for a Sacher.

- These two could both have done with just a little more, five more minutes.
- Mmm.

Made beautifully, Mary, may I say?

I think the glaze that you've got on the top is stunning. I think the ganache was superb.

- Proof of the pudding.
- Right.

- Hmm!
- Mmm, that's a bit of all right, isn't it? Mmm, very good.

Moist. Chocolaty.

There is a definite zing of that apricot that's left on there as well, that sweetness sitting there.

And again that almost fudge quality to that chocolate on the top.

Mary, fantastic. Absolutely fantastic.

This was the last of the technical challenges. A bit sad, really.

It is sad, but I've really enjoyed these masterclasses.

We've had plenty of time to go through every detail

of the technical challenges, so everybody at home can make them.

And all you need is a good pair of scales, good ingredients,

and follow every single step, and success should be the result.

I hope we've inspired everybody to get going.

Get into the kitchen and start baking.